"MAke thy selfe lesse Philotas then thou art"
What meanes my father thus to write to me?
Lesse then I am: in what? how can that bee?
Must I be then set vnderneath my hart?
Shall I let go the holde I haue of grace
Gaynd with so hard aduentures of my bloud,
And suffer others mount into my place,
And from below, looke vp to where I stood?
Shall I degrade th'opinion of my worth?
By putting off imployment; as vndone
In spirit or grace: whilst other men set forth
To get that start of action I haue wonne?
As if such men as I, had any place,
To stay betwixt their ruine, and their grace.
Can any go beyond me, but they will
Goe ouer me, and trample on my state,
And make their fortune good vpon my ill,
Whilst feare hath powre to wound me worse thē hate?
Philotas, you deceiue your selfe in this,
Your father meanes not you should yeeld in place,
But in your popular dependences:
Your entertainments, giftes, and publique grace,
That doth in iealous Kings, distaste the Peeres,
And makes you not the greater but in feares.
Alas what popular dependences
Do I retaine? can I shake off the zeale
Of such as do out of their kindnesses
Follow my fortunes in the common-weale.
Indeed Philotas therein you say true:
They follow do, your fortunes, and not you.
Yea but I find their loue to me sincere.
Euen such as to the Wolfe the Fox doth beare,
That visits him but to pertake his pray,
And seeing his hopes deceiu'd turnes to betray.
I know they would if I in danger stood,
Runne vnto me, with hazard of their bloud.
Yea like as men to burning houses run,
Not to lend ayde, but to be lookers on.
But I with bountie, and with gifts haue tyde
Their harts so sure, I know, they will not slide.
Bounty & guifts loose more then they do find,
Where many looke for good, few haue their mind:
Each thinkes he merits more then than he hath,
And so guifts laid for loue do catch men wrath.
But many meerely out of loue attend.
Yea, those that loue and haue no other end:
Thinke you that men can loue you when they know,
You haue them not for friendship, but for show?
And as you are ingag'd in your affaires,
And haue your ends, thinke, likewise they haue theirs.
But I do truly from my hart affect
Vertue and worth, where I do finde it set:
Besides my foes do force me in effect,
To make my partie of opinion great,
And I must arme me thus against their scornes,
Men must be shodd, that go among the thornes.
Ah good Philotas you your selfe beguile,
Tis not the way to quench the fire with oyle.
The meeke and humble Lambe with small adoo,
Sucks his owne dam, we see, and others too.
In Courtes men longest liue and keepe their rankes,
By taking iniuries, and giuing thankes.
And is it so? then neuer are these haires,
Like to attaine that sober hew of gray,
I cannot plaster and disguise m'affaires,
In other coulours then my hart doth lay.
Nor can I patiently indure this fond
And strange proceeding of authoritie,
That hath ingrost vp all into their hand,
By idol living feeble maiestie.
And impiously do labour all they can,
To make the King forget he is a man.
Whilst they deuide the spoyles, and pray of powre,
And none at all respect the publique good.
Those hands that guard and get vs what is our,
The Solderie ingag'd to vent their bloud,
In worse case seeme then Pallas old-growne Moyle,
Th' Athenians fostred at their publique cost;
For these poore soules consum'd with tedious toile
Remayne neglected, hauing done their most.
And nothing shall bring home of all these wars
But emptie age and bodies chardgd with skarres.
Philotas, all this publique care I feare
Is but some priuat touch of your dislike.
Who seeing your owne designes not stand to square
With your desires, no others courses like.
The griefe you take things are not ordred well,
Is that you feele your selfe I feare not well.
But when your fortunes shall stand paralel
With those you enuy now: all will be well.
For you great men, I see are neuer more
Your ends attain'd the same you were before.
You with a finger can point out the staynes
Of others errors now, and now condem
The traine of state, whilst your desire remaines
without. But once got in you iumpe with them,
And interleague ye with iniquity,
And with a like neglect do temporize
And onely serue your owne commodity:
Your fortune then viewes things with other eyes.
For either greatnesse doth transforme the hart
Int'other shapes of thoughts or certaynly
This vulgar honesty doth dwell apart
From powre, and is some priuate quallity,
Or rather those faire parts which we esteeme
In such as you, are not the same they seeme,
You double with your selues or els with vs.
And therefore now Philotas euen as good
Timbrace the times, as swell, and do no good.
Alas Chalisthenes you haue not layde
True leuell to my nature, but are wide
From what I ame within; all you haue sayde
Shall neuer make me of another side
Then that I am, and I do skorne to clyme
By shaking hands with this vnworthy time.
The time, Philotas then will break thy neck.
They dare not, freind, my faith wil keep my neck,
My seruice to the state hath causioned
So surely for myne honor, as it shall
Make good the place my deedes haue purchased
With daunger, in the loue, and harts of all,
Those seruices, will serue as waights to charge
And presse you vnto death, if your foot faile
neuer so little vnderneath your charge
And will be deem'd, donne for your owne auayle.
And who haue spirits to do the greatest good,
May do most hurt if they remaine not good.
Tush. They cannot want my seruice in the state.
These times want not men to supply the state.
I feare not whilst Parmenios forces stand.
Water far off quenches not fire neere hand.
You may be faire dispatcht, ere he can heare
Or if he heard, before he could be here.
And therefore do not build vppon such sand
It will deceiue your hopes, when all is doone
For though you were the minion of the land
If you breake out, be sure you are vndonne.
When running with the current of the state,
Were you the weakest man of men aliue
And in conuentions, and in counsayle sate
And did but sleepe or nod, yet should you thriue
These motiue spirits are neuer fit to rise,
And tis a danger to be held so wise.
What call you running with the state? shall I
Combine with those that do abuse the state?
Whose want of iudgment, wit and honesty,
I am ashamed to see, and seeing hate.
Tush, tush, my Lord, thinke not of vvhat were fit,
The world is gouernd more by forme, then witt.
He that will fret at Lords, and at the raine,
Is but a foole, and grieues himselfe in vaine.
Cannot you great men suffer others to
Haue parte in rule, but must haue all to doo.
Now good my Lord conforme you to the rest,
Let not your wings be greater then your nest.
See how these vain discoursiue Booke-men talke,
Out of those shadows of their ayerie powres,
And do not see how much they must defalk
Of their accounpts, to make them gree with ours.
They little know to what necessities,
Our courses stand allyed, or how we are,
Ingag'd in reputation other-wise
To be our selues in our particulare.
They thinke we can command our harts to lye,
Out of their place: and still they preach to vs
Pack-bearing Patience, that base property,
And silly gift of th'all induring Ass.
But let them talke their fill, it is but wind,
I must sayle by the compasse of my minde,
My Lord, the King calls for you come my Lord away.
Well then I know there's some new stratagem
In hand, to be consulted on to day.
That I am sent for with such speede, to him,
Whose youth and fortune cannot brooke delay.
But here's a Sutor standes t'impeech my hast,
I would I had gone vp the priute way:
Whereby we escape th'attending multitude,
Though I confesse, that in humanity
Tis better to deny, then to delude.
My Lord Philotas I am come with news,
Of great importance that concerns vs all,
And well hath my good fortune met with you:
Who best can heare, and best discharge my care.
Say what it is and pray-thee friend be briefe.
The case requires your patience good my lord,
And therefore I must craue your eare a while,
I cannot now be long from Alexander.
Nor Alexander will be long with vs,
Vnles you heare, and therfore know, the newes
I bring, concernes his life; and this it is,
There is one Dymnus here within the campe:
Whose low estate, and high affections
Seeme to haue thrust him int'outragious wayes.
This man affecting one Nichomacus
A youth, my brother, whom one day h'allures
Int'a temple where being both alone,
He breakes out in this sort: Nichomacus
Sweete louely youth, ah should I not impart
To thee the deepest secrets of my hart,
My hart that hath no lock shut against thee,
Would let it out some-times vnwares of me.
But as it issues from my faithfull loue,
So close it vp in thine, and keepe it fast:
Sweare to be secret deere Nichomacus.
Sweare by the sacred God-head of this place
To keepe my councell, and I will reueale
A matter of the greatest consequence
That euer man imparted to his friend.
Youth and desire drawne with a loue to know,
Swore to be secret, and to keepe it close
When Dymnus tells him, that within three dayes
There should b'effected a conspiracie
On Alexanders person, by his meanes
And diuers more of the Nobillitie,
To free their labours and redeeme them home,
Which when Nichomacus my brother heard:
Is this your tale saith he? O God forbid
Mine oath should tie my tongue to keepe in this.
This ouglie sinne of treason, which to tell
Mine oath compells me, faith against my faith
Must not be kept. My falshood here is truth
And I must tell. Friend or friend not, I'll tell.
Dymnus amaz'd, hearing beyond conceit
The self-willd youth vow to reueale their plot:
Stands staring on him, drawing back his breath,
Or els his breath confounded with his thoughts
Busied with death and horror, could not worke,
Not hauing leasure now, to thinke what was
But what would be, his feares were runne before,
And at misfortune ere she came to him.
At length yet, when his reason had reduc'd
His flying thoughts back to some certaine stand,
Perceiuing yet some distance was betwixt
Death and his feares which gaue him time to worke,
With his returning spirits he drew his sword,
Puts it t'his owne then to my brothers throate,
Then layes it downe, thē wrings his hands, thē kneeles.
Then stedfast lookes, then takes him in his armes,
Weepes on his neck, no word, but O wilt thou?
Wilt thou, be the destruction of vs all?
And finding no relenting in the youth.
His miserie grew furious and againe
He takes his sworde, and sweares to sacrifice
To silence and their cause, his dearest bloud.
The boy amaz'd, seeing no other way,
Was faine to vow, and promise secrecie;
And as if wonne t'allow and take that part,
Prayes him to tell, who were his complices.
Which, though perplext with grief for what was done,
Yet thinking now t'haue gained him to his side,
Dymnus replyes: no worse then Loceus,
Demetrius of the priuie Chamber, and
Nicanor, Amyntas, and Archelopis,
Drocenus, Aphebetus, Leuculaus,
Shall be th'associats of Nichomacus.
This when my brother once had vnderstood,
And after much adoe had got away
He comes and tells me all the whole discourse:
Which here I haue related vnto you,
And here will I attend t'auouch the same,
Or bring my brother to confirme as much.
Whome now I leaft behinde, least the conspirators
Seeing him here vnusing to this place,
Suspecting t'b'appeachd, might shifts away.
Well fellow, I haue heard thy strange report,
And will finde time t'acquaint the king therewith.
WHat can a free estate afford me more
Then my incaptiu'd fortune doth allow?
Was I beloud, inrich'd, and grac'd before?
Am I not lou'd, inrich'd, and graced now?
Yea, but before thou wert a kings delight.
I might be his although he was not mine.
His greatnes made thee greater in mens sight.
More great perhapps without, but not within:
My loue was then aboue mee, I am now
Aboue my loue. Darius then had thousands more
Philotas hath but me as I do know.
Nor none els will he haue, and so he swore.
Nay then you may belieue him, if he swore.
Alas poore soule, she neuer came to know
Her liberty, nor louers periuries.
Stand I not better with a meaner loue,
That is alone to mee, then with these powres,
Who out of all proportion must b'aboue
And haue vs theirs, but they will not be ours.
And Thais although thou be a Grecian,
And I a Persian, do not envie mee.
That I imbrace the only gallant man
Persia, or Greece or all the world can see.
Thou, who art intertain'd and grac'd by all
The flowre of honour els, do not dispise.
That vnto mee poore captiue should befall
So great a grace in such a worthies eyes.
Antigona,
I enuie not thy loue,
But thinks thee blest t'inioy him in that sort.
But tell me truly didst thou euer proue
Whether he lou'd in earnest or in sporte
Thais;
let m'a little glory in my grace,
Out of the passion of the ioy I feele
And tell the'a secret, but in any case,
As y'are a woman do not it reueile.
One day as I was fitting all alone,
In comes Philotas from a victory
All bloud and dust, yet iolly hauing wenne
The glory of the day most gallantly.
And warm'd with honor of his good Successe.
Relates to mee the daungers he was in:
Whereat I wondring, blam'd his forwardnes.
Faith wench, saies he, thus must we fight, toyle, win.
To make that yong-man proud, thus is he borne:
Vpon the winges of our disartes, our bloud
Setts him aboue himselfe and makes him skorne,
His owne, his country, and the Authors of his good.
My father was the first that out from Greece
Shewd him the way of Asia, set him on
And by his proiect raisd the greatest peece
Of this proud worke which now he treads vpon.
Parmenio without Alexander much hath wrought,
Without Parmenio, Alexander hath done nought.
But let him vse his fortune whilst he may,
Times haue their chaunge, we must not still be lead.
And sweet Antigona thou mayst one day
Yet, blesse the howre t'haue knowne Philotas bed.
Wherewith he sweetly kist me, and now deeme,
If that so great, so wise, so rare a man,
Would if he held me not in deare esteeme
Haue vttred this t'a captiue Persian.
But Thais I may no longer stay, for feare
My lord returne, and finde me not within,
Whose eyes yet neuer saw me any where
But in his chamber where I should haue bene.
And therefore Thais farewell.
Fare well Antigona.
Now haue I that which I desired long
Layd in my lap by this fond woman here,
And meanes t'auenge me of a secret wrong
That doth concerne my reputation nere.
This gallant man, whom this foole in this wise
Vaunts to be hers, I must confesse t'haue lou'd
And vs'd all th'ingins of these conquering eyes
Affections in his hy-built hart t'haue mou'd
Yet neuer could: for what my labour seekes
I see is lost vppon vaine ignorance.
Whilst he that is the glory of the Greekes
Virtues vpholder, honours countenance,
Out of this garnish of his worthy parts
Is falne vpon this foolish Persian,
To whom his secretes grauely he imparts,
Which she as wisely keepe and gouerne can:
Tis strange to see the humour of these men,
These great aspiring spirits that should be wise
We women shall know all; for now and then
Out of the humour of their iollities
The smoake of their ambition must haue vent,
And out it comes what rackes should not reuaile,
For this her humour hath so much of wind,
That it will burst it selfe if too close pent,
And none more fit then vs their wisedomes find,
Who will for loue or want of wit conceale.
For being the nature of great spirits, to loue
To be, where they may be most eminent,
And rating of themselues so far aboue
Vs in conceipt with whom they do frequent,
Imagin how we wonder and esteeme
AIl that they doo or say, which makes them striue
To make our admiration more extreame:
Which they suppose they cannot, lesse they giue
Notice of their extreame and highest thoughts.
And then th'opinion that we loue them too,
Begers a confidence of secrecie,
Whereby what euer they intend to doo,
We shall be sure to know it presently.
But faith, I scorne that such a one as shee,
A silly witted wench, should haue this grace
To be preferr'd and honor'd before me,
Hauing but onely beautie, and a face.
I that was euer courted by the Great
And gallanist Peeres and Princes of the East,
Whom Alexander in the greatest state
The earth did euer see him, made his guest.
There where this tongue obtained for her merit
Eternitie of fame: there where these hands
Did write in fire the glorie of my spirit,
And set a trophey that for euer stands.
Thaeïs Action with the Grecian acts shalbe
Inregistred alike. Thaeis she that fir'd
The stareliest Pallace th'earth did euer see,
Darius house that to the clouds aspir'd,
She is put back behind Antigona,
But soone Philotas shall his error see,
Who thinkes that beautie best, mens passions fits,
For that they vse our bodies, not our wittes:
And vnto Craterus will I presently,
And him acquaint with all this whose discourse,
Who I am sure will take it well of vs,
For these great minions, who with enuious eye
Looke on each others greatnesse, will be glad,
In such a case of this importancie,
To haue th'aduantage that may here be had.
WE as the Chorus of the vulgar, stand
Spectators here, to see these great men play
Their parts both of obedience and command,
And censure all they doo, and all they say.
For though we be esteemd but ignorant,
Yet are we capable of truth, and know
Where they do well, and where their actions want
The grace that makes them proue the best in show.
And though we know not, what they do within,
Where they attire, their misteries of state:
Yet know we by th'euents, what plottes haue beene,
And how they all without do personate.
We see who well a meaner part became,
Faile in a greater and disgrace the same.
We see some worthy of aduancement deem'd,
Saue when they haue it: some againe haue got
Good reputation, and beene well esteem'd
In place of greatnesse, which before were not.
We see affliction act a better scene,
Then prosperous fortune which hath marr'd it cleane.
We see that all which we haue praisd in some,
Haue onely beene their fortune, not desart:
Some warre haue grac'd, whom peace doth ill become:
And lustfull ease hath blemisht all their part.
Wee see Philotas acts his goodnesse ill,
And makes his passions to report of him
Worse then he is: and we doo feare he will
Bring his free nature to b'intrapt by them.
For sure there is some ingin closely laide
Against his grace and greatnesse with the King:
And that vnlesse his humors proue more staide,
We soone shall see his vtter ruining.
And his affliction, our compassion drawes,
Which still lookes on mens fortunes, not the cause.
EPhestion, thou doost Alexander loue,
Craterus thou the King: yet both you meete
In one selfe point of loyaltie and loue,
And both I finde like carefull, like discreet.
Therefore my faithfuls Councellours to you
I must a weightie accident impart,
Which lies so heauie, as I tell you true
I finde the burthen much t'oppresse my hart.
Ingratitude and stubborne carriage,
In one of whom my loue deseru'd respect,
Is that which moues my passion into rage,
And is a thing, I ought not to neglect.
You see how I Philotas raised haue
Aboue his ranck, his Peeres, beyond his terme:
You see the place, the offices I gaue,
As th'earnest of my loue to binde his firme.
But all, he deeming rather his desartes,
Then the effects of my grace any way,
Begins to play most peremptorie parts,
As fitter to controule then to obay.
And I haue bene inform'd, he fosters too,
The faction of that home-bent cowardize,
That would run back from glory, and vndoo
All the whole wonder of our enterprize,
And one day to our selfe presumes to write,
(Seeming our stile and title to abrayd,
Which th'oracles themselues held requisite
And which not I, but men on me haue laid)
And said he pittied those who vnder him should liue,
Who held himselfe the sonne of Iupiter.
Alas good man, as though what breath could giue
Could make mine owne thoughts other then they are.
I that am Arbiter betwixt my hart,
And theyr opinion, know how it stands within,
And find that my infirmities take part,
Of that same frailty, other men liue in.
And yet what if I were disposd to winke,
At th'intertaind opinion spred so far.
And rather was content the world should thinke
Vs other then we are, then what we are.
In doing which, I know I am not gone
Beyond example, seeing that Maiestie
Needs all the propps of admiration
That may be got to beare it vp on hye.
And much more mine, which but eu'n now begun
By miracles of fortune, and our worth,
Needes all the complements to rest vpon:
That reu'rence and opinion can bring forth,
Which this wise man conceiues not, and yet takes:
Vpon him to instruct vs what to do.
But these are but the florishes he makes,
Of greater malice he is bent vnto:
For sure me thinkes I view within his face,
The mapp of chaunge and inncuacion:
I see his pride contented with no place,
Vnles it be the throne I sit vpon.
Had I not heard this from your sacred tongue,
Deare soueraigne, I would neuer haue beleeued
Philotas folly would haue done that wrong
T'his owne worth, and th'honors he receiued,
And yet me thought of late his carriage.
In such exceeding pompe and galiantry,
And such a world of followers; did presage
That he affected popularity.
Especially since for his seruice done.
He was adiudgd to haue the second place
In honor with Antigonus, which wonne,
To some th'opinion to be high in grace.
Then this last action leading the right winge,
And th'ouerthrow he gaue, might happ inlarge
Th'opinion of himselfe considering,
Th'especiall grace and honor of his charge.
Whereby perhaps in rating his owne worth,
His pride might vnder-ualew that great grace:
From whence it grew, and that which put him forth.
And made his fortune suting to the place.
But yet I thinke he is not so vnwise,
Although his fortune, youth and iollity.
Makes him thus mad, as he will enterprize
Ought against course, his faith, and loyalty.
And therefore if your grace did but withdraw,
Those beames of fauour which doo daze his wits,
He would be soone reduc'd t'his rank of awe.
And know himselfe, and beare him as befits.
With-draw our grace, and how can that be donne
Without some sulliuation to insue.
Can he be safe brought in being so far gone,
I hold it not. Say Craterus what thinke you.
Soueraigne. I know the man, I find his spirit,
And malice shall not make me (I protest)
Speake other then I know his pride doth merit,
And what I speake is for your interest.
Which long ere this I would haue vttered,
But that I feard your maiesty would take,
That from some priuate grudge it rather bred,
Then out of care for your deare sisters sake.
Or rather that I sought to crosse your grace,
Or to confine your fauour within boundes,
And finding him to hold so high a place
In that deuine conceipt which ours confounds,
I thought the safest way to let it rest,
In hope, that time some passage open would,
To let in those cleere lookes into that brest
That doth but malice and confusion hold.
And now I see you haue discernd the man,
Whome I protest I hold most dangerous.
And that you ought with all the speed you can
Worke to represse a spirit so mutinous:
For eu'n already he is swolne so high,
That his affections ouer-flowe the brime
Of his owne powres, not able to deny
Passage vnto the thoughts that gouerne him.
For but euen now I heard a strange report
Of speeches he should vse t'his Curtizan:
Vaunting what he had done, and in what sort,
He labourd to aduance that proud yong man.
(So terming of your sacred maiesty)
With other such extrauagant discourse:
Whereof we shall attaine more certainty,
I doubt not shortly and discry his course,
Meane while about your person I aduise,
Your grace should call a more sufficient guard:
And on his actions set such wary eyes,
As may thereof take speciall good regarde.
And note what person chiefly he frequents:
And who to him haue the most free accesse,
How he bestowes his time, where he presents,
The large reuenue of his bounteousnesse.
And for his wench that lyes betwixt his armes,
And knowes his heart, I will about with her,
She shalbe wrought t'apply her vsuall charmes:
And I will make her my discouerer.
This counsell Craterus we do well allow,
And giue thee many thankes for thy great care.
But yet we must beare faire, lest he should know,
That we suspect what his affections are,
For that you see he holdes a side of powre:
which might perhapps call vp some mutinie.
His father old Parmenio at this howre,
Rules Medea with no lesser powres then I.
Himselfe you see gallantly followed:
Holds next to vs a speciall gouerment:
Canus that with his Sister married,
Hath vnder him againe comandement:
Amintas and Symanus his deare friends
With both their honorable offices.
And then the priuate traine that on them tendes,
With all perticuler dependences.
Are motiues to aduice vs how to deale.
Your grace saies true, but yet these cloudes of smooke
Vanish before the sun of that respect
Whereon mens long-inurd affections looke
With such a natiue zeale, and so affect,
As that the vaine and shallow practisies,
Of no such giddy traytor (if the thing,
Be tooke in time with due aduisednesse:
Shall the least shew of any fealing bring.
Well then to thee deare Craterus I refer,
Th'especiall care of this great busines.
MY Lord. I here haue long attendance made
Expecting to be calld t'auouch my newes.
In troth my friend I haue not found the king
At any leasure yet to heare the same.
No not at leasure to preuent his death?
And is the matter of no more import?
Ile try another. Yet me thinks such men,
As are the eyes and eares of princes, should,
Not weigh so light such an intelligence.
My lord the summe you willed me to giue,
The captaine that did visit you to day:
To tell you plaine your coffers yeald it not.
How, if they yeald it not, haue I not then,
Apparell, plate, iewells? why sel them:
And go your way, dispatch and giue it him.
Me thinks I find the king much chaungd of late,
And vnto me his graces not so great.
Although they seeme in show all of one rate,
Yet by the touch I find them counterfeit
For when I speake, although I haue his eare
Yet do I see his mind is other where.
And when he speakes to me I see he striues,
To giue a coulor vnto what is not,
For he must thinke that we whose states, whose liues,
Depend vpon his grace learne not by rote,
T'obserue his actions, and to know his trym,
And though indeede princes be manifold,
Yet haue they still such eies to waite on them
As are too piercing that they can beholde.
And penetrate the inwards of the hart,
That no deuice can set so close a dore,
Betwixt their shewes and thoughtes, but that their art
Of shadowing it, makes it appeare the more.
But many malicing my state of grace,
I know doo worke, with all the powers they haue
Vpon that easie nature, to displace
My fortunes, and my actions to depraue:
And though I know they seeke t'inclose him in,
And faine would lock him vp and chamber him:
Yet will I neuer stoope and seeke to win
My way by them, that came not in by them.
And skorne to stand on any other feet
Then these of mine owne worth; and what my plaine
And open actions cannot fairely get
Basenes and soothing them shall neuer gaine.
And yet, I know my presence and accesse,
Cleers all these mists which they haue raisd before:
Though with my back streight turnes that happinesse.
And they againe blow vp as much or more;
Thus do we role the stone of our owne toyle,
And men suppose our hell, a heauen the while.
ANtigona, there is no remedie,
You needs must iustifie the speech you held,
With Thais, who will your conf'rence verifie,
And therefore now it cannot be conceald.
O my good Lord I pray you vrge me not,
Thais onely of a cunning enuious wit,
Scorning a stranger should haue such a lot,
Hath out of her inuention forged it.
Why then shall rackes and tortures force thee show,
Both this and other matters which we know.
Thinke therefore if t'were not a wiser part,
T'accept of rest, rewards, preferment, grace,
And being perhaps so beautious as thou art,
Of fayre election for a neerer place,
To tell the truth, then to be obstinate,
And fall with the misfortune of a man,
Who in his dangerous and concussed state,
No good to thee but ruine render can.
Resolue thee of this choyce, and let me know
Thy minde at full, at my returning back.
What shall I doo, shall I betray my loue,
Or die disgrac'd? what do I make a doubt
Betray my loue? O heauenly powres aboue
Forbid that such a thought should issue out
Of this confused brest: nay rather first
Let tortures, death, and horror do their worst.
But out alas this inconsidrate tongue,
Without my hart's consent and priuitie,
Hath done already this vnwilling wrong,
And now it is no wisdome to deny.
No wisdome to deny? yes, yes, that tongue
That thus hath beene the traytor to my hart,
Shall either powrefully redeeme that wrong,
Or neuer more shall words of breath impart,
Yet what can my deniall profit him,
Whom they perhaps, whether I tell or not,
Are purpos'd vpon matters knowne to them,
To ruinate on some discouered plot.
Let them do what they will. Let not thy hart
Seeme to be accessarie in a thought,
To giue the leaft aduantage of thy part,
To haue a part of shame in what is wrought.
O this were well, if that my dangers could
Redeeme his perill, and his grace restore,
For which, I vow, my life I render would,
If this poore life could satisfie therefore.
But tis not for thy honour to forsake
Thy loue for death, that lou'd thee in this sort,
Alas what notice will the world take
Of such respects in women of my sort.
This act may yet put on so fayre a coate
Vpon my foule profession, as it may
Not blush t'appeare with those of cleanest note,
And haue as hye a place with fame as they.
What do I talke of fame? do I not see
This faction of my flesh, my feares, my youth
Already entred and haue bent at me,
The ioyes of life to batter downe my truth.
O my subdued thoughts! what haue you done?
To let in feare and falshood, to my hart.
Whom though they haue surprizd they haue not won,
For still my loue shall hold the dearest part.
Antigona what are you yet resolud.
Resolu'd my Lord t'indure all misery.
And so be sure you shall if that b'your choice.
What will you haue me doo my Lord, I am
Content to say what you will haue me say.
Then come go with me to Alexander.
HOw dost thou weare, and weary out thy dayes,
Restles ambition neuer at an end:
Whose trauails no Herculean pillor stayes,
But still beyond thy rest thy labors tend.
Aboue good fortune, thou thy hopes dost raise.
Still climing and yet neuer canst ascend:
For when thou hast attaind vnto the top,
Of thy desires thou hast not yet got vp.
That height of fortune either is contrould
By some more powrefull ouerlooking eie:
(That doth the fulnesse of thy grace withhold)
Or counter-checkt with some concurrencie:
That it doth cost far more adoo to hold,
The higth attaind, then was to get so hie.
Where stand thou canst not, but with carefull toyle,
Nor loose thy hold without thy vtter spoile.
There dost thou struggle with thine owne distrust,
And others iealosies, their conterplot:
Against some vnderworking pride that must,
Supplanted be, or els thou standest not:
There wrong is paid with wrong, and he that thrust:
Downe others, comes himselfe to haue that lot.
The same concussion doth afflict his brest
That others shooke, oppression is opprest
That either happines dwells not so hie,
Or els aboue. whereto pride cannot rise:
And that the hy'st of mans felicity,
But in the region of affliction lies:
And that we clime but vp to misery,
High fortunes are but high calamities,
It is not in that Sphere, where peace doth moue,
Rest dwels below it, happines aboue.
For in this hight of fortvne are imbred,
Those thundring fragors that affright the earth.
From thence haue all distempratures their head,
That bringes forth desolation, famine, dearth,
There certaine order is disordered:
And there it is confusion hath her birth.
It is that high of fortune doth vndoo,
Both her owne quietnes and others too.
COme, Metron say of whom hast thou receiued,
Th'intelligence of this conspiracie:
Contriud against our person, as thou sayst,
By Dymnus and some other of the Campe,
Is't not some vaine report borne without cause,
That enuie or imagination drawes
From priuate ends to breed a publike feare.
T'amuze the world with things that neuer were,
Here may it please your highnes is the man,
One Ceballinus that brought me the newes.
O Alexander I haue sau'd thy life.
I am the man that hath reueild their plot.
And how cam'st thou to be informd therof,
By mine owne brother, one Nichomacus,
Whom Dymnus chiefe of the conspirators,
Acquainted with the whole of their intents.
How long since is it, this was told to thee?
About some three dayes, my Soueraigne Lord.
What three dayes since? and hast thou so long kept
The thing cōceald from vs being of that weight.
Guard, take and lay him presently in hold:
O may it please your grace I did not keepe,
The thing conceald one houre, but presently,
Ran to acquaint Philotas therewithall,
Supposing him a man so nere in place,
Would best repect a case that toucht so neare;
And on him haue I waited these two dayes.
Expecting t'haue bene brought vnto your Grace,
And seeing him weigh it light, pretending that
Your graces leasure serud not fit to heare.
I, to the maister of your armory,
Addrest my selfe forthwith, to Metron here,
Who without making any more delay,
Prest in vnto your grace being in your bath,
Locking me vp the while in th'armorie,
And all what I could shew reuealed hath.
If this be so then, fellow I confesse,
Thy loyall care of vs was more then theirs,
Who had more reason theirs should haue bin more,
Cause Dymnus to be presently brought forth,
And call Philotas straight, who now I see
Hath not deceiu'd me, in deceiuing me,
Who would haue thought one whom I held so nere.
Would from my saftie haue bene so far off,
When most it should and ought import his care,
And wherein his allegeance might make proofe
Of those effects my fauours had deseru'd,
And ought t'haue claym'd more duly at his hands
Then any of the rest. But thus w'are seru'd.
When priuate grace out of proportion stands
And that we call vp men from of below:
From th'Element of baser property,
And set them where they may behold and know
The way of might and worke of maiestie.
Where se'ing those rayes, which being sent far off,
Reflect a heat of wonder and respect,
To faile nere hand and not to shew that proofe,
(The obiect onely working that effect,)
Thinke seeing themselues (though by our fauour) set.
Within the selfe same orbe of rule with vs,
Their light would shine alone if ours were set,
And so presume t'obscure or shadow vs.
But he shall know although his neerenes hath,
Not felt our heat that we can burne him too.
And grace that shines can kindle vnto wrath:
And Alexander and the king are two.
But here they bring vs Dymnus in whose face,
I see is gilt, dispayre, horror and death.
Yea death indeed, for ere he could b'attachd.
He stab'd himselfe so deadly to the hart,
As tis impossible that he should liue.
Say Dymnus what haue I deserud of thee:
That thou shouldst thinke worthier to be thy king,
Philotas then our selfe. Hold hold he sinkes:
Guard keepe him vp get him to answere vs.
H'hath spoke his last h'will neuer answer more.
Sorry I am for that, for now hath death,
Shut vs cleene out from knowing him within:
And lockt vp in his brest all th'others harts,
But yet this deed argues the truth in grosse,
Though we be bar'd it in particular.
Philotas? are you come looke here this man,
This Ceballinus should haue suffred death:
Could it but haue ben prou'd he had conceald,
Th'intended treason from vs these two dayes,
Wherewith he sayes he streight acquainted thee:
Thinke the more nere thou arte about our selfe,
The greater is the shame of thine offence.
And which had bene lesse foule in him then thee.
Renouned prince, for that my hart is cleare,
Amazement cannot ouercast my face,
And I must boldly with th'assured cheare,
Of my vnguilty conscience tel your grace:
That this offence (thus hapning) was not made,
By any the least thought of ill in mee:
And that the keeping of it vnbewraid,
was that I held the iumor vaine to be.
Considring some who were accusd were knowne,
Your auncient and most loyall seruitors:
And such as rather would let out their owne
Hart bloud, I know, then once indanger yours,
And for me then vppon no certaine note,
But on the brable, of two wanton youthes,
T'haue tolde an idle tale, that would haue wrought,
In your distrust, and wrong to others truthes,
And to no end but onely to haue made,
My selfe a scorne and odious vnto all.
(For which I rather tooke the baite was laide:
Then els for any treachery at all.)
I must confesse I thought the safest way,
To smoother it a while, to th' end I might,
Yf such a thing could be, some proufes bewray,
That might yeeld probability of right.
Protesting that mine owne vnspotted thought
A like beliefe of others truth did breed,
Iudging no impious wretch could haue bene wrought
T'imagin such a detestable deed.
And therefore O dread Sou'raigne do not way
Philotas faith by this his ouer-sight.
But by his actions past, and onely lay
Error t'his chardge, not malice not dispight.
Well, lo thou hast a fauourable iudge,
Whēn, though thou hast not powre to cleere thy blame,
Yet hath he powre to pardon thee the same,
Which take not as thy right but as his grace,
Since here the person alters not the case.
And here Philotas, I forgiue th'offence,
And to confirme the same, lo here's my hand.
O sacred hand the witnesse of my life,
By thee I hold my safetie as secure,
As is my conscience free from treacherie.
Well got'your charge, & looke to our affaires,
For we to morrow purpose to remoue.
In troth I know not what to iudge herein,
Me thinkes the man seemes surely cleare in this,
How euer otherwise his hopes haue beene,
Transported by his vnaduisednesse:
It cannot be, a guilty conscience should
Put on so sure a brow, or els by arte
His lookes stand newtrall, seeming not to hold
Respondencie of int'rest with his hart.
Sure for my part, he hath dissolu'd the knot
Of my suspition, with so cleere a hand,
As that I thinke in this (what euer plot
Of mischiefe it may be) he hath no hand.
My Lord, the greater confidence he shewes,
Who is suspected should be feard the more:
For danger from weake natures neuer growes,
Who must disturb the world are built therefore.
He more is to be feard that nothing feares,
And malice most effects, that least appeares.
Presumption of mens powres as well may breed,
Assurednesse, as innocency may:
And mischiefe seldome but by trust doth speed,
Who kings betray, first their beleife betray.
I would your grace had first conferrd with us
Since you would needes such clemency haue showne.
That we might yet but haue aduisd you thus,
That he his danger neuer might haue knowne.
In faults wherein an after shame will liue.
Tis better to conceale then to forgiue.
For who are brought vnto the block of death,
Thinke rather on the perrill they haue past:
Then on that grace which hath preserud their breath,
And more their suffrings then their mercie taste,
He now to plot your danger still may liue.
But you his guilt not alwayes to forgiue.
Know that a man so swolne with discontent,
No grace can cure nor pardon can restore:
He knowes how those who once haue mercie spent,
Can neuer hope to haue it any more.
But say that through remorce he calmer proue,
Will great Parmenio so attended on,
With that braue Armye fostred in his loue:
Be thankfull for this grace you do his sonne?
Some benefits are odious, so is this:
Where men are still ashamed to confesse,
To haue so done as to deserue to die:
And euer do desire that men should gesse,
They rather had receiud an iniury,
Then life, since life they know in such a case,
May be restord to all but not to grace.
And for my part my liege I hold this minde
That sure he would not haue so much supprest,
The notice of a treason in that kinde,
Vnlesse he were a party with the rest:
Can it be thought that great Parmenios sonne,
The generall commander of the horse:
The minion of the campe the onely one,
Of secret counsell, and of free recourse
should not in three dayes space haue found the king,
At leasure t'heare three wordes of that import:
Whilst he himselfe in idle lauishing,
Did thousands spend t'aduance his owne report?
And if he gaue no credit to the youth,
Why did he two dayes space delay him then?
As if he had belieu'd it for a truth,
To hinder his addresse to other men:
If he had held it but a vaine conceipt,
I pray why had he not dismist him streight?
Men in their priuate daungers may be stoute:
But in th'occasions and the feares of kings,
We ought not to be credulous, but doubt,
The intimation of the vainest things.
Well howsoeuer, we will yet this night
Disport and banquet in vnusuall wise.
That it may seeme we weigh this practise light,
How euer heauy, here within it lies.
Kings may not know distrust, and though they feare,
They must not take acquaintance of their feare.
OY'are a secret councell-keeper Thais,
In troth I little thought you such a one:
And why Antigona what have I done.
You know fulwell your conscience you bewraies,
Alas good soule would you have me conceale:
That which your selfe could not but needes reueile?
Thinke you another can be more to you,
In what concernes them not, then you can be,
Whom it imports? Will others hold them true:
When you proue false to your owne secrecie?
But yet this is no wonder, for we see
Wiser then we do lay their heads to gage
For ryotous expences of their tongues,
Although it be a property belongs,
Especially to vs and euery age,
Can shew strange presidents what we haue ben,
In cases of the greatest plots of men.
And tis the Scene on this worlds stage we play,
Whose reuolution, we with men conuert,
And are to act our parte as well as they:
Though commonly the weakest, yet a-part.
For this great motion of a state we see,
Doth turne on many wheeles, and some though smale
Do yet the greater moue, who in degree
Stirre those who likewise turne the great'st of all.
For though we are not wise, we see the wise
By vs are made or make vs parties still,
In actions of the greatest quallities
That they can manage, be they good or ill.
I cannot tell; but you haue made mee doo,
That which must euer more aflict my hart,
And if this be my wofull parte t'vndo,
my dearest loue, would I had had no part.
How haue I sealy woman sifted bene
Examind, tryde, flattred, terrifide,
By Craterus the cunningest of men,
That neuer leaft me till I had discride
What euer of Philotas I had knowne.
What is that all? perhapps I haue thereby
Done thee more good then thou canst apprehend.
Such good I rather you should get then I.
If that can be a good t'accuse my friend.
Alas thy accusation did but quote
The margin of some text of greater note.
But that is more then thou or I can tell.
Yes yes Antigona I know it well.
For be thou sure that alwayes those who seeke
T'attack the Lyon, so prouide that still,
Their toyles be such as that he shall not skape
To turne his rage on those that wrought his ill.
Philotas neither was so strong nor high
But malice ouerlookt him, and discride,
Where he lay weake, where was his vanity,
And built her contermonts vpon that side,
In such sorte as they would be sure to raze
His fortunes with the ingins of disgrace.
And now maist thou perhapps come great hereby,
And gracious with his greatest enemie.
For such men thinke they haue no full succes:
vnles they likewise gaine the mistresses,
Of those they maister, and succeed the place,
And fortunes of their loves with equall grace
Loues! out alas, loue such a one as hee,
That seekes t'vndoo my loue, and in him me?
Tush, loue his fortunes, loue his state, his place,
What euer greatnesse doth it must haue grace.
I weigh not greatnesse I must please mine eye.
Th'eye nothing fairer sees then dignity.
But what is dignity without our loue?
If we haue that we cannot want our loue,
Why that giues but the outside of delight:
The day-time ioy, what comfort hath the night?
If powre procure not that, what can it doo?
I know not how that can b'attaind vnto.
Nor will I teach thee if thou knowst it not.
Tis vaine I see to learne an Asian wit.
If this be that great wit, that learned skill,
You Greekes professe let me be foolish still,
So I be faithfull. And now being here alone,
Let me record the heauy notes of mone.
MY Lords, you see the flexible conceipt,
Of our indaungered soueraigne, and you know:
How much his perile, and Philotas pride,
Imports the state and vs, and therefore now,
We either must oppose against deceipt:
Or be vndon. For now hath time discride,
An open passage to his farthest ends,
From whence if negligence now put vs back,
Returne we neuer can without our wrack.
And good my Lords since you conceiue as much,
And that we stand alike, make not me prosecute
The cause alone as if it did but touch
Onely my selfe, and that I did both breed,
And vrge these doubts out of a priuate griefe.
Indeed I know I might with much more ease,
Sit still like others, and if dangers come
Might thinke to shift for one as well as they,
But yet the faith the duty and respect:
We owe both to our soueraigne and the state,
My Lords, I hold, requires another care.
My Lord, assure you we will take a time
To vrge a stricter count of Dymnus death.
My Lords I say vnles this be the time,
You will apply your phisicke after death.
You see the king inuited hath this night
Philotas with the rest, and intertaines
Him with as kinde an vsage to our sight,
As euer, and you see the cunning straines
Of sweet insinuation that are vsd
Tallure the eare of grace with false reports,
So that all this will come to be excusd;
With one remoue, one action quite transports
The kings affections ouer to his hopes,
And sets him so beyond the due regard
Of his owne safety, as one enterprize,
May serue their turne, and may vs all surprize.
But now since things thus of them selue break out
We haue aduantage to preuent the worst,
And eu'ry day will yeald vs more no doubt,
For they are sau'd that thus are warned first.
So my Lord Clitus are they likewise warn'd.
T'accelarate their plot, being thus bewraide.
But that they cannot now it is too late
For treason taken ere the birth, doth come
Abortiue, and her wombe, is made her tombe
You do not know how far it hath put forth
The force of malice, nor how far is spred
Already the contagion of this ill.
Why then there may some one be tortured
Of those whom Ceballinus hath reueald
Whereby the rest may be discouered.
That one must be Philotas from whose head
All this corruption flowes, take him, take all.
Philotas is not nam'd, and therefore may
Perhappes not be acquainted with this plot.
That his concealing of the plot bewrayes,
And if we do not cast to find him first.
His wit be sure hath layd so good a ground,
As he will be the last that wilbe found.
But if he be not found: then in this case,
We doo him more by iniuring his grace.
If that he be not found t'haue delt in this,
Yet this will force out some such thoughts of his,
As will vndoo him, for you seldome see,
Such men araignd that euer quitted be:
Well my Lord Craterus we will moue his grace
(Though it be late) before he take his rest,
That some course may be taken in this case,
And God ordaine it may be for the best.
SEE how these greatmen cloth their priuate hate,
In those faire coulours of the publique good:
And to effect their ends pretend the state,
As if the state by their affections stood.
And arm'd with powre and princes iealosies,
Will put the least conceipt of discontent:
Into the greatest ranke of treacheries:
That no one action shell seeme innocent.
Yea, valour, honor bounty shall be made,
As accessaries vnto endes vniust:
And euen the seruice of the state must lade,
The needfull'st vndertakings with distrust.
So that base vilenesse idle luxurie,
Seeme safer far, then to do worthily.
Suspicion full of eyes, and full of eares,
Doth thorow the tincture of her owne conceipt,
See all thinges in the coulours of her feares:
And truth it selfe must look like to deceipt,
That what ways' euer the suspected take,
Still, enuy will most cunningly forelay
The ambush of their ruine, or will make
Their humors of themselues to take that way.
But this is still the fate of those that are,
By nature or their fortunes eminent.
Who either carried in conceipt too far,
Do worke their owne or others discontent:
Or els are deemed fit to be supprest.
Not for they are, but that they may be ill,
Since states haue euer had far more vnrest,
By spirits of worth, then men of meaner skill:
And find that those do alwayes better proue,
Wh'are equall to imployment not aboue.
For selfe opinion would be seene more wise
Then present counsels, customes, orders lawes,
And to the end to haue them otherwise,
The common wealth into combustion drawes,
As if ordaind t'imbroyle the world with wit,
Aswell as grosenesse to dishonour it.
CAn there be such a sudaine change in Court
As you report? is it to be belieud
That great Philotas whom we all beheld
In grace last night should be arraignd to day.
It can be: and it is as I report
For states of grace are no sure holds in courts.
But yet tis strange they should be ouerthrowne
Before their certaine forfeitures were knowen.
Tush it was breeding long though suddenly
This thunder-crack comes but to break out now.
The time I wayted and I waited long
Vntill Philotas with some other Lords
Depart the presence, and as I conceiud,
I neuer saw the king in better mood,
Nor yet Philotas euer in more grace
Can such stormes grow and yet no clouds appeare?
Yea court stormes grow when skies there seeme most cleare
It was about the deepest of the night
The blackest howre of darknesse and of sleepe
When with some other lords comes Craterus
Falles downe before the King, intreats, implores,
Coniures his grace as euer he would looke
To saue his person and the state from spoile,
Now to preuent Philotas practises.
Whom they had plainly found to be the man
Had plotted the distruction of them all.
The king would faine haue put them off to time
And farther day, till better proofes were knowne
Which they perceiuing prest him still the more
And reinforc'd his dangers and their owne.
And neuer left him till they had obtaind
Commission t'apprehend Philotas streight.
Now to make feare looke with more hidious face,
Or els but to beget it out of forme,
And carefull preparations of distrust:
About the pallace men in armour watch
In armour men about the king attend,
All passages and issue were forelaid
With horse, t'interrupt what euer newes
Should hence breake out into Parmenios campe.
I with three hundred men in armour chargd
Had warrant to attach and to committ
The person of Philotas presently:
And comming to his lodging where he lay,
Found him imburied in the soundest sleepe
That euer man could bee. where neither noice
Of clattring weapons, or our rushing in
With rude and trampling rumour, could dissolue
The heauie humour of that drowsie brow
Which held perhaps his sences now more fast
As loath to leaue because it was the last.
Attarras, what can treason sleepe so sound?
Will that lowd hand of Horror that still beats,
Vpon the guilty conscience of distrust:
Permit it t'haue so resolute a rest?
I cannot tell but thus we found him there,
Nor could wee I assure you waken him:
Till thrice I calld him by his name, and thrice
Had shooke him hard, and then at length he wakes,
And looking on me with a setled cheere,
Deare friend Attarras, what's the newes said hee?
What vp so soone to hasten the remoue,
Or raisd by some al'arme or some distrust?
I told him that the king had some distrust.
Why what will Nabarzanes play saith he
The villaine with the king; as he hath done
Already with his miserable Lord?
I seeing he would, or did not vnderstand
His owne distreste: told him the charge I had:
Wherewith he rose, and rising vsd these words:
O Alexander now I see my foes,
Haue got aboue thy goodnes, and preuaild:
Against my innocency and thy word.
And as we then inchain'd and fettred him,
Looking on that base furniture of shame,
Poore body, said he, hath so many alarme
Raysd thee to bloud and danger from thy rest,
T'inuest thee with this armor now at last,
Is this the seruice I am cald to now?
But we that were not to attend his plaints,
Couering his head with a disgracefull weed:
Tooke and conuaid him suddainly to warde,
From whence he shalbe instantly brought forth,
Here to b'arraignd before the king, who sits,
(According to the Macedonian vse)
In cases capitall, himselfe, as Iudge.
Well then I see who are so high aboue,
Are nere to lightning that are nere to Ioue.
THe haynous treason of some few had like
T'haue rent me from you worthie soldiers,
But by the mercy of th'immortall Gods
I liue, and ioy your sight, your reuerend sight,
Which makes mee more t'abhore those parracides,
Not for mine owne respect, but for the wrong,
You had receiued, if their designe had stood.
Since I desire but life to do you good.
But how will you be mou'd when you shall know,
Who were the men that did attempt this shame:
When I shall show that which I grieue to show:
And name such as would God I could not name,
But that the foulnesse of their practise now:
Blots out all memory of what they were
And though I would suppresse them, yet I know,
This shame of theirs will neuer but appeare.
Parmenio is the man, a man you see
Bound by so many merits both to me
And to my father, our ancienst frend
A man of yeares, experience grauity,
Whose wicked minister Philotas is
Who here Dimetrius Luculaus, and
This Dymnus whose dead body here you see
With others hath subornd to slaughter mee.
And, here comes Motron with Nichomacus
To whom this murthred wretch at first reueald
The proiect of this whole conspiracie
T'auere as much as was disclosd to him.
Nichomacus looke here aduise thee well,
What dost thou know this man that here lies dead?
My soueraigne Lord: I know him very well,
It is one Dymnus who did three dayes since
Bewray to me a treason practised
By him and others to haue slaine your grace.
Where or by whome, or when did he report
This wicked act should be accomplished?
He said within three dayes your maiesty
Should be within your chamber murthered
By speciall men of the nobillity
Of whom he many namd, and they were these:
Loceus, Dimetrius, and Archelopis
Nicanor and Amyntas, Luculous
Droceus with Aphebaetus and himselfe.
Thus much his brother Ceballinus did
Reueale to me from out this youthes report.
And so much with the circumstance of all
Did I vnto Philotas intimate.
Then what hath bene his mind, who did suppresse
The information of so foule a traine
Your selues my worthy Soludiers well may gesse,
Which Dymnus death declares not to be vaine.
Poore Ceballinus not a moment stayes,
To redischarge himselfe of such a waight,
Philotas careles, fearelesse, nothing weighes
Nor ought reueales. His silence shews deceipt,
And tels he was content it should be done
Which though he were no party makes him one.
For he that knew vpon what powre he stood
And saw his fathers greatnes, and his owne
Saw nothing in the way which now withstood
His vast desires, but onely this my crowne.
Which in respect that I am issulesse
He thinkes the rather easie to b'attaind
But yet Philotas is deceiud in this
I haue who shall inherit all I gaind.
In you I haue both children, kindred friends
You are the heires of all my purchases,
And whilst you liue I am not issuleste.
And that these are not shadowes of my feares,
(For I feare nought but want of enemies,)
See what this intercepted letter beares,
And how Parmenio doth his sonnes aduise:
This showes their ends, hold read it Craterus.
My sonnes, First have a special care vnto your selues
Then vnto those which do depend on you.
So Shall you do what you intend to doo.
See but how close he writes, that if these lines
Should come vnto his sonnes, as they are sent,
They might incourage them in their disseignes,
If interpris'd, might mock the ignorant.
But now you see what was the thing was ment,
You see the fathers care the sonnes intent.
And what if he as a conspirator,
Was not by Dymnus nam'd among the rest:
That shewes not his innocencie but his powre,
Whom they account too great to be supprest:
And rather will accuse themselues then him,
For that whilst he shall liue, there's hope for them.
And how h'hath borne himselfe in priuate sorte.
I will not stand to vrge, it's too well knowne,
Nor what hath bene his arrogant reporte:
T'imbase my actions, and to bragge his owne.
Nor how he mockt my letter which I wrote:
To shew him of the stile bestowd on mee,
By th'Oracle of Ioue. these things I thought
But weaknesses, and wordes of vanity,
(Yet words that read the vlcers of his hart)
Which I supprest, and neuer ceast to yeald
The cheife rewards of worth and still compart,
the best degrees and honors of the field.
In hope to win his loue, yet now at length,
There haue I danger where I lookt for strength:
I would to God my bloud had rather bene
Powrd out, the offring of an enemy;
Then practizd to be shed by one of mine,
That one of mine should haue this infamy.
Haue I bene so reserud from feares to fall
There where I ought not to haue feard at all!
Haue you so oft aduisd me to regard
The safety, which you saw mee running from,
When with some hote pursute I pressed hard
My foes abrode; to perish thus at home?
But now that safty only rests in you
Which you so oft haue wisht me looke vnto.
And now vnto your bosomes must I fly
Without whose will I will not wish to liue:
And with your wils I cannot; lesse I giue
Due punishment vnto this treachery.
Attarras, bring the hatefull prisoner forth
This traitor which hath sought t'vndoo vs all,
To giue vs vp to slaughter, and to make
Our bloud a skorne, here in a barberous land.
That none of vs should haue retourned back,
Vnto our natiue country, to our wiues
Our aged parents, kindred, and our friends.
To make the body of this glorious host
A most deformed trunke without a head,
Without the life or soule to guide the same
O thou base traitor impious parracide,
Who mak'st me loath the bloud that match'd with thine
And if I might but haue my will. I vow
Thou shouldst not die by other hand then mine.
Fie Caenus what a barbarous course is this
He first must to his accusation pleade.
And haue his triall, formall to our lawes
And let him make the best of his bad cause
Philotas here the Macedonians are
To iudge your fact, what language wilt thou vse?
The Persian language if it please your grace,
For that, beside the Macedonians, here
Are many that will better vnderstand,
If I shall vse the speach your grace hath vs'd,
Which was I hold vnto no other end,
But that the most men here might vnderstand.
See how his natiue language he disdaines,
But let him speake at large as he desires,
So long as you remember he doth hate
Besides the speech our glory and the state.
Black are the coulours laid vpon the crime,
Wherewith my faith stands chargd my worthy lords;
That as behind in fortune so in time,
I come too late to cleere the same with words.
My condemnation is gone out before
My innocency, and my iust defence:
And takes vp all your harts, and leaues no dore
For mine excuse to haue an enterance.
That destitute of all compassion, now,
Betwixt an vpright conscience of desart,
And an vniust disgrace, I know not how
To satisfie the time, and mine owne hart.
Authority lookes with so sterne an eye
Vpon this wofull Bar, and must haue still
Such an aduantage ouer misery
As that it will make good, all that it will.
He who should onely iudge my cause, is gone,
And why he would not stay, I do not see,
Since when my cause were heard his powre alone,
As well might then condemne as set me free:
Nor can I by his absence now be clear'd
Whose presence hath condemn'd me thus vnheard.
And though the greeuance of a prisoners tongue,
May both superfluous and disgracefull seeme,
Which doth not sue, but shewes the iudge his wrong:
Yet pardon mee, I must not disesteme
My rightfull cause for being dispisd, nor must
Forsake my selfe, though I am leaft of all,
Feare cannot make my innocence vniust
Vnto it selfe, to giue my truth the fall.
And I had rather, seeing how my fortune drawes,
My words should be deformed then my cause.
I know that nothing is more delicate
Then is the sence and feeling of a state:
The clappe, the bruit, the feare but of a hurt
In kings behalfes, thrusts with that violence
The subiects will to prosecute report,
As they condemne, ere they discerne th'offence.
Philotas you deceiue your self in this
That thinke to win compassion, and beliefe
B'impugning iustice and to make men gesse
We doo you wrong out of our heat of griefe,
Or that our place or passions did lay more
On your misfortunes, then your owne deseart
Or haue not well discernd your fact before,
Or would without, due proofes your state subuert,
These are the vsuall theames of traytors tongues
Who practise mischiefs, and complaine of wrongs
Your treasons are too manifestly knowne
To maske in other liuery then their owne.
Thinke not, that we are set to charge you here
With bare suspicions but with open fact,
And with a treason that appeares as cleare
As is the sunne, and knowne to be your act.
What is this treason? who accuses mee?
The processe of the whole conspiracy.
But wher's the man that names me to be one?
Here this dead traitor shews you to be one.
How can he dead, accuse me of the same
Whom liuing he nor did, nor yet could name.
But we can other testimonie show
From those who were your chiefest complices.
I am not to b'adiudgd in law, you know,
By testimony, but by witnesses.
Let them be here produc'd vnto my face
That can auouch m'a party in this case.
My Lords and fellowe soldiers if of those
Whom Dymnus nominated, any one
Out of his tortures will a word disclose
To shew I was a party: I haue done.
Thinke not so great a number euer will
Endure their torments and themselues accuse
And leaue me out. Since men in such case, still
Will rather slander others then excuse.
Calamity malignant is, and he
That suffers iustly for his guiltinesse
Eases his owne affliction, but to see
Others' tormented in the same distresse,
And yet I feare not whatsoeuer they
By rackes and tortures can be forced to say.
Had I bene one would Dymnus haue conceald,
My name being held to be the principall?
would he not for his glory haue reueald
The best to him to whom he must tell all?
Nay if he falsly then had nam'd me one?
To grace himselfe, must I of force be one.
Alas, if Ceballinus had not come to me
And giuen me note of this conspiracy
I had not stood here now but bin as free
From question as I am from treachery.
That is the only cloud that thundereth
On my disgrace. Which had I deemed true
Or could but haue deuind of Dymnus death,
Philotas, had, my Lords, sat therewith you.
My fault was to haue bene too credulous
Wherein I shewd my weaknesse I confesse.
Philotas what a monarch and confesse
Your imperfections and your weaknes?
O Craterus, do not insult vpon calamity,
It is a barberous grossnes to lay on
The weight of skorne where heauy misery
Too much already waies mens fortunes downe
For if the cause be ill I vndergo,
The law and not reproch must make it so.
Ther's no reproch can euer be too much
To lay on traitors, whose desearts are such.
Men vse the most reproches where they feare
The cause will better proue then their desire.
But sir, a traitors cause that is so cleere.
As this of yours will neuer need that feare.
I ame no traitor but suspected one,
For not beleiuing a conspiracie.
And mere suspect by law condemneth none,
They are approued facts for which men die.
The law in treasons doth the will correct
With like seuerenes as it doth th'effect.
Th'affection is the essence of th'offence,
The execution onely but th'accidence,
To haue but will'd it, is t'haue done the same.
I did not erre in will, but in beliefe,
And if that be a traitor, then am I the cheefe.
Yea but your will made your beliefe consent
To hide th'practise till th'accomplishment.
Beliefe turnes not by motions of our will,
And it was but the euent that made that ill.
Some facts men may excuse, though not defend,
Where will & fortune haue a diuers end.
Th'example of my father made me feare,
To be too forward to relate things heard.
Who writing to the king, wisht him forbeare,
The potion his phisition had prepard.
For that he heard Darius tempted had,
His faith, with many talents, to b'vntrue.
And yet his druggs in th'end not prouing bad,
Did make my fathers care seeme more then due.
For oft by an vntimely dilligence,
A busy faith may giue a prince offence.
So that, what shall wee doo? if wee reueale,
Wee are dispis'd, suspected if conceale.
And as for this where euer now thou bee
O Alexander thou hast pardon'd me.
Thou hast alreadie giuen me thy hand,
The earnest of thy reconciled hart.
And therefore now ô let thy goodnes stand,
Vnto thy word, and be thou as thou wert.
Yf thou beleuidst me then, I am absolud,
Yf pardon'd me, these fetters are dissolu'd.
What haue I els deseru'd since yester night,
When at thy table I such grace did finde,
What hainous crime hath since beene brought to light,
To wrong my faith, and to diuert thy mind?
That from a restfull quiet most profound
Sleeping, in my misfortunes, made secure
Both by thy hand, and by a conscience sound,
I must be wak't for Gyues, for robes impure,
For all disgrace that on me wrath could lay,
And see the worst of shame, ere I saw day.
When I least thought that others crueltie,
Should haue wrought more thē thine owne clemency.
Philotas whatsoeuer glosse you lay,
Vpon your rotten cause, it is in vaine,
Your pride, your cariage, euer did bewray.
Your discontent, your malice, and disdaine.
You cannot palliat mischiefe but it will,
Th'row all the fairest couerings of deceipt
Be alwaies seene; we know those streames of ill,
Flow'd from that head that feed them with conceipt.
You foster malcontents, you intertaine
All humors, you all factions must imbrace.
Yow vaunt your owne exploites, and you disdaine
The kings proceedings, and his stile disgrace.
You promise mountaines, and you draw men on,
With hopes of greater good then hath bene seene.
You braggd of late that something would be donne
Whereby your Concubine should be a Queene.
And now we see the thing that should be donne.
But God be praisd we see you first vndonne.
Ah do not make my nature, if it had,
So pliable a sterne of disposition,
To turne to euery kindnes, to be bad,
For doing good to men of all condition.
Make not you charitie t'interprete all
Is donne for fauor to be donne for show,
And that we in our bounties prodigall,
Vpon our ends not on mens needes bestow.
Let not my one daies error make you tell,
That all my life-time I did neuer well.
And that because this falles out to be ill,
That what I did, did tend vnto this ill.
It is vniust to ioine t'a present fact
More of time past then it hath euer had
Before to doo with-all, as if it lackt
Sufficient matterels to make it bad.
I do confesse indeed I wrote somthing.
Against this title of the sonne of Ioue,
And that not of the king but to the king,
I reely vs'd these words out of my loue,
And thereby hath that dangerous liberty
Of speaking truth, with trust on former grace
Betraid my meaning vnto emnity
And drawne an argument of my disgrace.
So that I see though I spake what I ought,
It was not in that maner as I ought.
And God forbid that euer soldiers words
Should be made lyable vnto misdeedes,
When fainting in their march, tyrd in the fight,
Sick in their tent, stopping their wounds that bleedes,
Or haut and iolly after conquest gote
They shall out of their heate vse words vnkind,
Their deeds deserue to haue them rather thought
The passion of the season, then their minde.
For souldiers ioy, or wrath is measurelesse,
Rapt with an instant motion, and we blame,
We hate, we prayse, we pitty in excesse
According as our present passions flame.
Sometimes to passe the Ocean we would faine
Sometimes to other worlds, and sometimes slack
And idle, with our conquests, intertaine
A sullen humor of returning back.
All which conceipts one trumpets sound doth end,
And each man running to his rankes doth lose
What in our tents dislikt vs, and we spend
All that conceiued wrath vpon our foes.
And words, if they proceed of leuity
Are to be skornd, of madnesse pittied
If out of malice or of iniury
To be remiss'd or vnacknowledged:
For of themselues they vanish by disdaine,
But if pursude they will be thought not vaine.
But wordes according to the person weigh,
If his designes are hainous so are they,
They are the tinder of sedition, still,
Wherewith you kindle fiers inflame mens will.
Craterus you haue th'aduantage of the day,
The law is yours to say what you will say.
And yet doth all your Glosse but beare the sence,
Onely of my misfortune not offence.
Had I pretended mischief to the king,
Could not I haue effected it without
Dimnus? did not my free accesse bring
Continuall meanes t'haue brought the same about?
Was not I since I heard the thing discride,
Alone, and arm'd in priuate with his grace,
What hindred me that then I had not tride
T'haue done that mischiefe, hauing time and place?
Philotas euen the prouidence aboue.
Protectresse of the sacred state of kings,
That neuer suffers trecherie to haue
Good councell, neuer in this case but bringes
Confusion to the actors, did vndo
Your harts, in what you went about to do.
But yet dispayre we see doth thrust men on
Se'ing no way els t'vndoo er be vndon.
That same dispaire doth likewise let men fall
In that amaze they can do nought at all.
Well, well, my Lords my seruice hath made known,
The faith I owe my Soueraigne and the state
Philotas forwardnesse hath euer showne
Vnto all nations at how high a rate
I prizd my king, and at how low my bloud,
To do him honor and my countrie good.
We blame not what y'haue bene, but what you are:
We accuse not here your valour, but your fact,
Not to haue bene a leader in the warre,
But an ill subiect, in a wicked act.
Although we know, thrust rather with the loue
Of your owne glory, then with duty lead
You haue done much, yet all your courses proue
You tide still your achieuements to the head
Of your owne honor, when it had bin meete,
You had them layd, downe at your soueraignes feete.
God giues to kings the honor to commaund,
To subiects all their glory to obay:
Who ought in time of war as rampiers stand,
In peace as th'ornaments of state aray.
The king hath recompensd your seruices
With better loue then you shew thankfulnesse.
By grace, he made you greater then you were
By nature: you receiu'd that which he was not tide
To giue to you: his guift was far more deere
Then all you did, in making you imployd.
But say your seruice hath deseru'd at all,
This one offence hath made it odious all.
And therefore here in vaine, you vse that meane
To plead for life, which you haue canceald cleane.
My lord you far mistake mee if you deeme
I plead for life, that poore weake blast of breath,
From which so oft I ran with light esteeme
And so well haue acquainted mee with death,
No no, my Lords, it is not that I feare
It is mine honor that I seeke to cleare.
And which if my disgraced cause would let
The language of my hart be vnderstood,
Is all which I haue euer sought to get
And which - (o leaue mee now) and take my bloud.
Let not your enuy go beyond the bound
Of what you seeke: my life stands in your way;
That is your ayme, take it and do not wounde
My reputation with that wrong I pray.
If I must needes be made the sacrifice
Of enuy, and that no oblation will
The wrath, of Kings but onely bloud, suffize,
Yet let me, haue something left that is not ill.
Is there no way to get vnto our liues
But first to haue our honour ouerthrowne?
Alas though grace of Kings all greatnesse giues
It cannot giue vs vertue, that's our owne
Though all be theirs our harts and hands can do
Yet that by which we doo is onely ours:
The trophies that our blood erects vnto
Their memory to glorifie their powres
Let them inioy: yet onely to haue done
Worthy of grace let not that be vndone.
Let that high swelling riuer of their fame
Leaue humble streames that feed them yet their name
O my deare father didst thou bring that spirit
Those hands of vallour that so much haue done.
In this great worke of Asia, this to merit
By dooing worthily to be vndone?
And hast thou made this purchase of thy sword
To get so great an Empire for thy Lord
And so disgrac'd a graue for thee and thine,
T'extinguish by thy seruice all thy line?
One of thy sonnes by being too valourous
But fiue daies since, yet ô well, lost his breath
Thy deare Nicanor th'halfe arch of thy house,
And here now the other at the barr of death
Stands ouerchardgd with wrath in far worse case
And is to be confounded with disgrace.
Thy selfe must giue th'acquitance of thy blood
For others debts to whom thou hast done good.
Which if they would a little time afford
Death would haue taken it without a sword.
Such the rewards of great imployments are
Hate kills in peace, whom fortune spares in war.
And this is that high grace of Kings we seeke,
Whose fauour, and whose wrath consumes a like.
Lo here the misery of kings, whose cause
How euer iust it be, how euer strong,
Yet in respect they may, their greatnesse drawes
The world to thinke they euer do the wrong.
But this foule fact of yours you stand vpon
Philotas shall beside th'apparancy
Which all the world sees plaine, ere we haue done
By your owne mouth be made to satisfie.
The most stiffe partialist that will not see.
My mouth will neuer proue so false I trust
Vnto my hart, to shew it selfe vniust:
And what I here do speake I know my lords
I speake with mine owne mouth, but other where
What may be said I say, may be the words
Not of my breath, but fame that oft doth erre,
Let th'oracle of Ammon be inquired
About this fact, who if it shall be true
Will neuer suffer those who haue conspird
Against Ioues sonne t'escape without their due;
But will reueale the truth, or if this shall
Not seeme conuenient: why then lay on all
The tortures that may force a tongue to tell,
The secret'st thought that could imagin ill.
What need we sēd to know more then we know
That were to giue you time t'acquaint your friends
With your estate, till some combustion grow
Within the camp to hasten on your ends:
And that the gold and all the treasury
Committed to your fathers custody
In Media, now might arme his desp'rat troupes
To come vpon vs and to cut our throtes.
What shall we aske of Ioue that which he hath
Reueald already? but let's send to giue
Thanks that by him, the king hath skapt the wrath
Of thee disloyall traitor and doth liue.
Lets teare the wretch in peeces, let vs rend
With our owne hands, the traitrous paracide.
Peace, Belon, silence louing souldiers.
You see my lords out of your iudgments graue,
That all excuses sickly colours haue,
And he that hath thus false and faithles bene,
Must finde out other gods and other men
Whom to forsweare, and whom he may decelue,
No words of his can make vs more belieue
His impudence, and therefore seeing tis late,
We till the morning, do dismisse the court.
WEll then I see there is small difference
Betwixt your state and ours, you ciuill Greeks,
You great contriuers of free gouerments.
Whose skill the world from out all countries seekes.
Those whom you call your kings are but the same
As are our soueraigne tirants of the East,
I see they onely differ but in name,
Th'effects they shew agree, or neere at least.
Your great men here as our great Satrapaes
I see laid prostrate are with basest shame,
Vpon the least suspect, or iealousies
Your Kings conceiue or others envyes frame,
Onely herein they differ, that your Prince
Proceeds by forme of law t'effect his end;
Our Persian Monarch makes his frowne conuince
The strongest truth: his sword the proces ends
With present death, and maks no more adoo,
He neuer stands to giue a glosse vnto
His violence, to make it to appeare
In other hew, then that it ought to beare,
Wherein plaine dealing best his course commends
For more h'offends who by the law offends
What neede hath Alexander so to striue
By all these shewes of forme to find this man
Guilty of treason, when he doth contriue
To haue him so adiudgd, do what he can.
He must not be acquit, though he be clere
Th'offendor not th'offence is punisht here.
And what availes the fore-condemnd to speake
How euer strong his cause, his state is weake.
Ah, but it satisfies the world, and wee
Think that well don, which done by law we see.
And yet your law serues but your priuate ends
And to the compasse of your powre extends.
But is it for the majesty of Kings
To sit in iudgments thus themselues with you?
To do men iustice is the thing that bringes
The greatest maiesty on earth to Kings.
That by their subalternate ministers
May be performed as well, and with more grate
For to command it to be don infers
More glory then to doo. It doth imbase
Th'opinion of a powre t'invulgar so
That sacred presence, which should neuer go,
Neuer be sene, but even as Gods below
Like to our Persian Kings in glorious show.
And who as starres affixed to their Sphere
May not descend to be from what they are.
Where kings are so like gods, there subiects are not men,
Your king begins this course, & what wil you be thē?
Indeed since prosperous fortune gaue the raine
To head-strong powre and lust, I must confesse
We Grecians haue lost deepely by our gayne,
And this our greatnesse makes vs much the less;
For by th'accession of these mighty states
Which Alexander wonderously hath got
He hath forgot himselfe, and vs, and rates
His state aboue mankind, and ours at noughs.
This hath thy pompe, ô feeble Asia, wrought,
Thy base adorings hath transformd the King
Into that shape of pride, as he is brought
Out of his witts, out of acknowledging
From whence the glory of his greatnesse springes,
And that it was our swords that wrought these thinges.
How well were we within the narrow bounds
Of our sufficient yeelding Macedon,
Before our kings inlardgd then with our wounds
And made these salies of ambition.
Before they came to giue the regall law
To those free states which kept their crownes in awe.
They by these large dominions are made more
But we become far weaker then before.
What get we now by winning but wide mindes
And weary bodyes with th'expence of bloud?
What should ill doo, since happy fortune findes
But misery, and is not good, though good?
Action begets still action, and retaines
Our hopes beyond our wishes, drawing on
A neuer ending circle of our paines
That makes vs not haue donne, when we haue done.
What can giue boundes to Alexanders ends
Who countes the world but small, that calles him great:
And his desires beyond his pray distends
Like beasts that murther more then they can eate?
When shall we looke his trauailes will be donne,
That tends beyond the Ocean and the Sunne?
What discontentments will there still arise
In such a Campe of kings, to inter-shock
Each others greatnesse, and what mutinies,
Will put him from his comforts, and will mock
His hopes, and neuer suffer him to haue
That which he hath of all which fortune gaue?
And from Philotas bloud (ô worthy man)
Whose body now rent on the torture lyes
Will slow that vaine of fresh conspiracies,
As ouer-flow him will, do what he can.
For cruelty doth not imbetter men
But them more wary makes, then they haue ben.
Are not your great-men free from tortures then
Must they be likewise rackt, as other men?
Treason affords a priuiledg to none
Who like offends, hath punishment all one.
FRriend Sostratus, come, haue you euer knowne
Such a distracted face of court as now,
Such a distrustfull eye, as men are growne
To feare themselues and all: and do not know
Where is the side that shakes not, who lookes best
In this foule day, th'oppressor or th'opprest.
What posting, what dispatches, what aduice,
What search, what running, what discoueries?
What rumors, what suggestions, what deuice
To cleere the king, please people, hold the wise,
Refraine the rude, crush the suspected sorte
At vnawares, ere they discearne th'are hurt.
So much the fall of such a weighty peere
Doth shake the state, and with him tumble downe,
All whom his beame of fauour did vpbeare,
All who to rest vpon his base were knowne.
And none that did but touch vpon his loue
Are free from feare to perish with his loue.
My selfe whom all the world haue knowne t'imbrace
Parmenio in th'intirenes of my hart,
And euer in all battayles, euery chace
Of daunger, fought still next him on that part:
Was seazd on this last night, late in my bed,
And brought vnto the presence of the king
To pay I thought the tribute of my head,
But ô twas for a more abhorred thing:
I must redeeme my daunger with the bloud
Of this deare friend, this deare Parmenios bloud.
His life must pay for mine, these hands must gore,
That worthy hart, for whom they fought before.
What hath the king commanded such a deed,
To make the harts of all his subiects bleed?
Must that olde worthy man Parmenio die?
O Sostratus he hath his doome to die,
And we must yeald vnto necessity.
For comming to the king, and there receiud
With vnexpected grace, he thus began:
Polidamas we both haue ben deceiud
In holding friendship with that faithlesse man
Parmenio, who for all his glozing mine
Thou seest hath sought to cut my throte and thine,
And thou must worke reuenge for thee and me:
And therefore haste to Media speedely,
Take these two letters here, the one from mee
Vnto my sure and trustie seiuants there,
The other signed with Philotas seale,
As if the same t'his father written were:
Carry them both, effect what I haue said,
The one will giue th'accesse, the other ayde,
I tooke the letters, vowd t'effect the same.
And here I go the instrument of shame.
But will you charge your honour with this shame?
I must or be vndone with all my name.
For I haue left all th'adamantiue tyes
Of bloud and natūre, that can hold a hart
Chaind to the world; my br̄ethren and allies
The Ostages to caution for my parte.
And for their liues must I dishonor mine.
Els should the king rather haue turnd this sword
Vpon my hart, then forst it impiously,
(Hauing done all faire seruice to his Lord
Now to b'imployd in this foule villanie.)
Thus must we do who are inthrald to kings,
whether they will iust or vnlawfull things.
But now Parmenio, ô me think I see
Thee walking in th'artificiall Groue
Of pleasant Susis, when I come to thee,
And thou remembering all our ancient loue
Hastes to imbrace me. Saying ô my friend,
My deare Polidamas, welcome my friend,
Well art thou come that we may sit and chate
Of all the old aduentures we haue run.
Tis long Polidamas since we two met,
How doth my soueraigne Lord, how doth my sonne?
When I vile wretch, whilst m'answere he attends
With this hand giue the letter, this hand ends
His speaking ioy, and stabbs him to the hart.
And thus Parmenio thou rewarded art
For all thy seruice, thou that didst agree
For Alexander to kill Attalus
For Alexander I must now kill thee.
Such are the iudgments of the heauenly powrs,
We others ruynes worke, and others ours.
Why this is right now Alexander takes
The course of powre, this is a Persian tricke,
This is our way, here publike triall makes
No doubtfull noyse, but buries clamor quick.
Indeed now Persia hath no cause to rew,
For you haue vs vndone, who vndid you.
THis worke is donne, the sad Catastrophe
Of this great act of bloud is finisht now.
Philotas ended hath the tragedy.
Now good my friend I pray thee tell vs how.
As willing to relato as you to heare
A full-chargd hart is glad to finde an eare.
The Councell being dismissd from hence, and gone,
Still Craterus plyes the King, still in his eare,
Still whispering to him priuately alone,
Vrging it seemd a quick dispatch of feare:
For they who speako but priuately to Kings,
Do seldome speake the best and fittest things.
Some would haue had him forthwith ston'd to death.
According to the Macedonian course:
But yet that would not satisfie the breath
Of busie rumour; but would argue force,
There must be some confessions made within,
That must abrode more satisfaction minne.
Craterus with Caenus and Ephestion,
Do mainely vrge to haue him tortured,
Whereto the king consents, and there vppon
They three are sent to see't accomplished.
Racks, Yrons, Fires, the grisely torturers
Stand hidcously prepard before his face.
Philotas all vnmou'd, vnchaungd appeares,
As if he would deathes ougliest brow out-face,
And skornd the worst of force, and askt them why
They staid to torture the kings enemy.
That part was acted well, God grant we heare
No worse a Scene then this, and all goes cleare.
So should worth act, and they who dare to fight
Against corrupted times should dye vpright:
Such harts kings may dissolue but not defeat,
Agreat man where he falles he should lye great
Whose ruine (like the sacred carkeses
Of skattred temples which still reuerent lie,
And the religious honour them no lesse
Then if they stood in all their gallantry.
But on with thy report.
Straight were hote-yrons appli'd to sere his flesh,
Then wresting racks, his comely body straine:
Then yron whipps and then the rack a-fresh,
Then fire againe, and then the whipps againe:
Which he indures with so resolud a looke
As if his mind were of another side
Then of his body, and his sence for sooke
The part of nature, to be wholy tyde
To honor, that he would not once consent
So much as with a sight' his punishment.
Yet doth he like himselfe yet all is well.
This Argument no tyrant can refell,
This plea of resolution winnes his cause
More right then all, more admiration drawes,
For we loue nothing more then to renowne
Men stoutely miserable, highly downe.
But now?
We feare that but. O if he ought discend
Leaue here, and let the Tragedie here end,
Let not the least act now of his at last,
Marre all his act of life and glories past.
I must tell all, and therefore giue nie leaue,
Swolne with raw tumors, vlcered with the ierks
Of Iron whips, that slesh from bene had razed,
And no part free from wounds; it erkes
His soule to see the house so foule defast,
Wherein his life had dwelt so long time clene,
And therefore craues he, they would now dismisse
His grieuous tortures, and he would begin
To open all wherein h'had donne amisse.
Streight were his tortures ceast, and after they
Had let him to recouer sense he said,
Now Craterus say, what you will haue me say?
Wherewith as if deluded, or delaid,
Cratetus in wrath calles presently againe,
To haue the tortures to be reapplied.
When what soeuer secret of his hart
Which had bene fore-conceiued but in athought
What friend soeuer had but tooke his part
In common loue h'accus'd; and so forgot
Himselfe that now he was more forward to
Confesse, then they to vrge him thereunto,
Whether affliction had his spirits vndonne,
Or seeing to hide or vtter was all one;
Both waies lay death, and therefore he would vie
Now to be sure to say enough to die.
and then began his fortunes to deplore
Humbly besought them, whom he skornd before,
That Alexander where he stood behind
A Trauers, out of sight, was heard to speake:
I neuer thought a man that had a mind
T'attempt so much, had had a heart so weake.
There he confest that one Hegelochus,
When first the King proclaimd himselfe Ioues sonne:
Incene'd his fathers heart against him thus,
By telling him that now we were vndone,
If we indur'd, that he which did disdaine
To haue beene Philips sonne, should liue and raigne.
He that aboue the state of man will straine
His stile, and will not be that which we are,
Not onely vs contemnes, but doth disdaine
The godds themselues, with whom he would compare,
We haue lost Alexander, lost (said he)
The King; and fallen on pride and vanitie:
And we haue made a God of our owne bloud,
That glorifies himselfe, neglects our good.
Intollerable is this impious deed,
To Godds, whom he would match, to men he would exceed.
Thus having over-night Hegelochus
Discoursd: my father sends next day
For me to heare the same: and there to vs
All he had said to him made him re-say.
Supposing out of wine the night before
He might but idlic raue. When he againe
Far more inragd; in heat and passion more
Vrgd vs to clere the state of such a stayne.
Coniurd vs to redeeme the common-weale
And doo like men, or els as men conceale.
Parmenio thought whilst yet Darius stood
This course was out of season; and thereby
Th'extinguishing of Alexanders bloud
Would now not profit vs, but th'enemy.
But he once dead; we seazing th'others powres
Might make all th' orient, and all Asia ours,
That course we lik't, to that our councell stands,
There-to we tyde our oaths, and gaue our hands.
And as for this, he said, for Dymnus plot,
Though he were cleere yet now it cleer'd him not.
And yet the force of racks at last could do
So much with him, as he confest that too.
And said that fearing Bactra would detaine
The king too long, he hastned on his endes,
Least that his father, Lord of such a traine
And such a wealth, an whome the whole depends,
Should being aged, by his death preuent
These his designes, and frustrate his intent.*
O would we had not heard this latter iarre,
This all his former straines of worth doth marre:
Before this last his foes his spirit commends,
But now he is vnpittied of his friends.
Then was Demetrius likewise brought in place,
And put to torture, who denies the deed,
Philotas he auerres it to his face.
Demetrius still denies: then he espide
A youth one Calm that was standing by;
Calin said he, how long wilt thou abide,
Demetrius vainely to auouch a lie.
The youth, that neuer had ben nam'd before
In all his tortures, gaue them cause to gesse
Philotas car'd not now to vtter more
Then had bene priuie to his practises.
And seeing they had as much as they desir'd,
They with Demetrius ston'd him vnto death,
And all whom Dymnus nam'd to haue conspird,
With greeuous tortures now must loose their breath:
And all that were allyde which could not flie,
Are in the hands of Iustice now to dye.
What must the punishment ariue beyond
Th' offence, not with th'offender make an end?
They all must dye who may be feard in time
To be the heires vnto their kindreds crime,
All other punishments end with our breath,
But treason is pursude beyond our death,
The wrath of Kings doth seldome measure keepe,
Seeking to cure bad parts they lance too deepe:
When punishment like lightning should appeare
To few mens hurt, but vnto all mens feare.
Great Elephants, and Lyons murther least,
Th' ignoble beast is the most cruell beast,
But all is well if by the mightie fall
Of this great man, the King be safely freed:
But if this Hydra of ambition shall
Have other heads, to spring vp in his steed
Then hath he made but way for them to rise,
Who will assault him with fresh trecheries.
The which may teach vs to obserue this straine,
T'admire high hills, but liue within the plaine.