WIthdraw, we must haue priuate conference
With our deere husband.
What wouldst thou wife?
Be what I am not, make thee greater farre
Then thou canst aime to be.
Why I am Tarquin.
And I am Tullia what of that?
What Diapasons more in Tarquins name
Then in a Subiects? or what's Tullia
More in the sound, then to become the name
Of a poore Maide or waiting Gentlewoman?
I am a princesse both by birth and thoughts,
Yet all's but Tullia, theres no resonance
In a bare stile: my title beares no breadth,
Nor hath it any state, oh me, i'me sicke!
Sick Lady?
Sick at heart.
Why my sweete Tullia?
To be a Queene I long, long and am sicke
With ardence, my hot appetite's afire,
Till my swolne feruor be deliuered
Of that great Title Queene, my heart's all royal,
Not to be circumscribed in seruill bounds,
While there's a King that rules the Peers of Rome.
Tarquin makes legs and Tullia curtesies lowe,
Bowes at each nod, and must not neere the state
Without obeysance, oh! I hate this awe, my prowd heart cannot brooke it.
Heare me wife.
I am no wife of Tarquini if not King:
Oh had God made me man, I would haue mounted
Aboue the base tribunals of the earth,
Vp to the clowdes, for pompeous soueraintie,
Thou art a man, oh beare my royall minde,
Mount heauen and see if Tullia lag behinde,
There is no earth in me, I am all fire,
Were Tarquin so, then should we both aspire.
Oh Tullia, though my body taste of dulnesse,
My soule is wingde: loe I soare as high as thine,
But note what flags our wings! fortie fiue yeares
The King thy father hath protected Rome.
That makes for vs: the people couet change,
Euen the best things in time grow teadious.
T'would seeme vnnaturall in thee my Tullia,
The reuerend King, thy Father to depose:
A kingdomes quest, makes Sonnes and Fathers foes.
And but by Seruius fall we cannot climbe,
The balme that must annoynt vs is his blood.
Lets laue our browes then in that crimson flood,
We must be bolde and dreadlesse, who aspires,
Mounts by the liues of Fathers, Sonnes, and Sires.
And so must I, since for a kingdomes loue,
Thou canst despise a Father for a Crowne:
Tarquin shall mount, Seruius be tumbled down,
For he vsurpes my state, and first deposde,
My father in my swathed Infancye,
For which he shall be countant to his end.
I haue founded all the Peires and Senators,
and though vnknowne to thee my Tullia,
They all imbrace my faction, and so they
Loue change of state, and new King to obey.
Now is my Tarquin, worthy Tullias grace
Since in my armes, I thus a King embrace.
The King should meete this day in Parliament,
With all the Senates and Estates of Rome:
His place will I assume, and there proclaime,
All our decrees in Royall Tarquins name.
May it please thee Noble Tarquin to attend
The King this day within the high Capitol?
Attend?
We intend this day to see the Capitoll,
You knew our father good Lucretius?
I did my Lord.
Was not I his Sonne?
The Queene my Mother was of royall thoughts
and heart pure, as vnblemisht Innocence.
Why askes my Lord?
Sonnes should succeede their fathers, but anon
You shall heare more, high time that we were gone.
Theres morrall sure in this, Valerius,
Heeres modell, yea, and matter too to breed
Strange meditations in the prouident braines
Of our graue Fathers: some strange proiect liues
This day in Cradle thats but newly borne.
No doubt Colatine, no doubt heeres a giddie world, it Reeles, 
it hath got the staggers, the common-wealth is sicke of an ague, 
of which nothing can cure her but some violent and suddaine affrightment.
The wife of Tarquin would be a Queene, 
nay on my life she is with childe till she be so.
and longes to be brought to bed of a Kingdome, 
I deuine we shall see some scuffling to day in the Capitoll.
If there be any difference among the Princes and Senate, 
whose faction will Valerius follow?
Oh Collatine! I am a true Cittizen and in this I will best shew my selfe to be one, 
to take part with the stronger. If Servius ore-come, I am Liegeman to Servius, 
& if Tarquin subdue, I am for Viue Tarquinius.
Valerius, no more, this talke does but keepe vs from the sight of this solemnitie: 
by this the Princes are entring the Capitoll: come, we must attend.
This place is not for fooles, this parliament
assembles not the straines of Ideotisme:
Only the graue and wisest of the land:
Important are th' affaires wee haue in hand.
Hence with that mome.
Brutus forbeare the presence.
For beare the presence, why pra'y?
None are admitted to this graue concourse,
But wise men: nay good Brutus.
Youle haue an emptie parliament then.
Heere is no roome for fooles.
Then what makst thou heere, or he or he? oh Iupiter? if this commaund be kept strictly, 
wee shall haue emptie benches: get you home you that are heere, 
for heere will be nothing to doe this day: a generall concourse of wise-men,
tw'as neuer seene since the first Chaos. Tarquin if the general rule haue no exceptions, 
thou wilt haue an empty Consistory.
Brutus, you trouble vs.
How powerfull am I you renowned Deities, 
that am able to trouble her that troubles a whole Empire? 
fooles exempted, & women admitted! laugh Democritus, 
but haue you nothing to say to Madmen?
Madmen haue heere no place.
Then out a dores with Tarquin: whats hee that may sit in a calme Valley, 
and will choose to repose in a tempestious mountaine, but a madman? 
that may liue in tranquilous pleasures, and will seeke out a kingdomes-cares, but a madman?
who would seeke innouation in a common-wealth in publike, 
or be ouer-ruld by a curst wife in priuate, but a foole or a mad-man? 
giue me thy hand Tarquins, shal we two be dismist together from the Capitoll?
Restraine his folly.
Driue the frantique hence.
Nay Brutus.
Good Brutus.
Nay soft, soft good blood of the Tarquins, lets haue a few colde words first, 
and I am gone in an instant: I claime the priuiledge of the nobilitie of Rome, 
and by that priuiledge my seate in the Capitol. I am a Lord by birth, 
my place is as free in the Capitol as Horatius, thine, or thine Lucretius. 
Thine Sextus, Arnus thine, or any here: I am a Lord and banish all the Lords from the presence, 
& youle haue few to wait vpon the King but Gentlemen: nay I am easily perswaded then, 
hands off, since you will not haue my company, you shal haue my roome:
My roome indeede, for what I seeme to be,
Brutus is not, but borne great Roome to free.
The state is full of Dropsie, and swolne bigge
With windy vapors, which my sword must pierce,
To purge th'infected blood: bred by the pride
Of these infested blouds, nay now I goe.
Beholde I vanish, since tis Tarquins minde,
One small foole goes, but great fooles leaues behinde 
Tis pittie one so generously deriu'd
Should be depriu'd: his best induements thus,
And want the true directions of the soule.
To leaue these delatorie trifles, Lords,
Now to the publique businesse of the Land,
Lords take your seuerall places.
Not great Tarquin, before the King assume his regall throane
Whose comming we attend.
Hee's come already.
The King?
The King:
Seruius.
Tarquinius:
Seruius is King.
It was by power diuine,
The Throane that long since hee vsurpt is mine.
Heere we enthroane our selues Cathedral state,
Long since detain'd vs, iustly we resume,
Then let our friendes, and such as loue vs, crie
Liue Tarquin and enioy this soueraintie.
Liue Tarquin and enioy this soueraintie.
The King himselfe with such considerate Peeres
As stoutly embrace his faction, being informde
Of Tarquins vsurpation, armed comes,
Neere to the entrance of the Capitoll.
No man giue place, he that dares to arise
And doe him reuerence, we his loue despise.
Traitor.
Vsurper.
Descend.
Sit still.
In Servius name, Romes greate imperiall monarch,
I charge thee Tarquin disinthrone thy selfe.
and throw thee at our feete, prostrate for mercy.
Spoke like a King.
In Tarquins name, now Romes imperiall Monarch,
We charge thee Seruius make free resignation,
Of that archt wreath thou hast vsurpt so long.
Words worth an Empire.
Shal this be brookt my Soueraigne?
Dismount the Traitor.
Touch him he that dares.
Dares!
Dares?
Strumpet, no childe of mine.
Dotard, and not my father.
Kneele to thy King?
Submit thou to thy Queene.
Insufferable treason! with bright steele
Lop downe these interponents, that withstand
The passage to our throane.
That Cocles dares.
We with our steele, guard Tarquin and this chaire.
A Seruius.
A Tarquin.
Now are we King, indeede our awe is builded
Vpon this royall base, and slaughtered body
Of a dead King; we by his ruine rise
To a Monarchall Throane.
We haue our longing.
My fathers death giues me a second life,
Much better than the first, my birth was seruitud
But this new breath of reigne is large and free,
Welcome my second life of Soueraintie.
I haue a Daughter, but I hope of mettle,
Subiect to better temperature: should my Lucrece,
Be of this pride, thefe handes should sacrifice
Her blood vnto the Gods that dwell belowe,
The abortiue brat should not out liue my spleene,
But Lucrece is my Daughter, this my Queene.
Teare off the crowne, that yet empales the Temples
Of our vsurping Father: quickly Lords,
And in the face of his yet bleeding woundes,
Lets vs receiue our honours.
The same breath
Giues our state life, that was the Vsurpers death.
Heere then by heauens hand we inuest our selues:
Musique, whose loftiest tunes grace Princes crownde,
Vnto our Noble coronation sound.
Whome doth Valerius to our state present?
Two valiant Romans, this Horatius Cocles,
This Gent. cal'd Mutius Sceuola,
Who whilst King Seruius wore the Diadem,
Vp held his sway and Prince-dome by their loues:
But he being falne, since all the Peeres of Rome
Applaud King Tarquin in his soueraintie,
They with like suffrage greet your coronation.
This hand alyde vnto the Roman Crowne,
Whome neuer feare deiected or cast low,
Laies his victorious sword at Tarquins feete,
And prostrates with his sword, allegiance.
King Seruius life we lou'd, but he expirde
Great Tarquins life, is in our hearts desirde.
Why? whilst he rules with Iustice and integritie,
Shall with our dreadles hands, our hearts commaund,
Euen with the best imployment of our liues,
Since fortune lifts thee, we submit to fate,
Our selues are vassailes to the Roman state.
Your roomes were emptie in our traine of friendes,
Which we reioyce to see so wel supplyde:
Receiue our grace, liue in our clement fauours,
In whose submission our young glorie growes
To his ripe height: fall in our friendly traine,
And strengthen with your loues our Infant raigne.
We liue for Tarquin.
And to thee alone, whilst Iustice keepes thy Sword & thou thy Throane.
Then are you ours, and now conduct vs streight,
In triumph through the populous streetes of Rome,
To the Kings Pallace our maiesticke seate:
Your hearts though freely profferd we entreate.
What block is that we treade on?
Tis the body
Of your deceased Father Madam, Queene
Your shoe is crimsend with his vitall bloud.
No matter, let his mangled body lye,
and with his base confederates strewe the streets,
That in disgrace, of his vsurped pride,
We ore his truncke may in our Chariot ride:
For mounted like a Queene, twould doe me good
To wash my Coach-nailes in my fathers blood.
Heer's a good Childe.
Remoue it, we commaund, and beare his carkasse to the funerall pile
Where after this direction, let it haue
His solemne and due obsequies, faire Tullia,
Thy hate to him growes from thy loue to vs.
Thou shewst thy selfe in this vnnaturall strife,
an vnkinde Daughter, but alouing wife.
But on vnto our Pallace this blest day,
A Kings encrease, growes by a Kings decay.
Murder the King, a high and capitall treason.
Those Giants that wagde war against the Gods,
For which ore-whelmed Mountaines hurld by Ioue,
To scatter them, and giue timelesse Graues,
Was not more cruell then this butcherie.
This slaughter made by Tarquin, but the Queene,
A woman, fie, fie, did not this shee parracide
add to her fathers wounds: and when his body
Lay all besmeard and staind in the blood royall,
Did not this Monster, this infernate hagge
Make her vnwilling, Chariater driue on,
and with his shod wheeles crush her Fathers bones,
Breake his craz'd scull, and dash his braines
Vpon the pauements, whilst she hold the raines?
The affrighted Sunne, at this abhorred obiect,
Put on a maske of blood, and yet she blusht not,
Ioue art thou iust, hast thou reward for pietie?
and for offence no vengance? or canst punnish
Fellons, and pardon Traitors, chastice murdrers,
and winke at parracides? If thou be worthy
as well we know thou art, to fill the Throane
Of all eternitie, then with that hand
That flings the trisalitie thunder, let the pride
Of these our Irreligious monarkisers
Be crown'd in blood: this makes poore Brutus mad,
To see sin frolick, and the vertuous sad.
Soft, heeres Brutus, let vs acquaint him with the newes.
Content, now Cousen Brutus:
Who, I your kinsman? though I be of the blood of the Tarquins, 
yet no cousen, gentle princes.
And why so Brutus, scorne you our allyance?
No, I was cousen to the Tarquins, when they were subiects, but dare claime no kindred, 
as they are soueraignes: Brutus is not so mad though he be merrie, 
but hee hath wit enough to keepe his head on his shoulders.
Why doe you my Lord thus loose your houres, and neither professe 
warre nor domestique profit? the first might beget you loue, the other riches.
Because I would liue: haue I not answered you because I would liue? 
fooles and Mad-men are no rubes in the way of Vsurpers: 
the firmament can brook but one Sunne, and for my part I must not shine: 
I had rather liue an obscure black, then appeare a faire white to be shot at, the end of all 
I would live: had Servius been a shrub, the winde had not shooke him, 
or a mad-man hee had not perisht: I couet no more wit nor imployment 
then as much as will keep life and soule together, I would but liue.
You are to satyricall cousen Brutus, but to the purpose: 
the King dreamt a strange ominous dreame last night, and to be resolu'd of the euent, 
my brother Sextus and I must to the Oracle.
And because we would bee well accompained, wee haue got leaue of the 
King that you Brutus shall associate vs, for our purpose is to make a merrie iourney on't.
So youle carrie me along with you to be your foole, & make you merrie.
Not our foole, but—
To make you merrie: I shall, nay, I will make you merrie, or tickle you till you laugh: 
the Oracle; ile goe to bee resolu'd some doubts priuate to my selfe: nay Princes, 
I am so much endeerd both to your loues and companies, 
that you shall not haue the power to be ridde of mee, what limits haue we for our iourney?
Fiue daies: no more.
I shal fit me to your preperation, but one thing more, goes Colatine along?
Collatine is troubled with the common disease of all new married men, hee's sick of the wife, 
his excuse is forsooth that Lucrece wil not let him goe, but you hauing 
neither wife nor wit to hould you, I hope will not disapoint vs.
Had I both, you should preuaile with me aboue another.
We shall expect you.
Horatius Cocles, a and Mutius Sceuola are not engadge in this expedition,
No they attend the King, farwell.
Lucretius stayes at home to, and Valerius.
The Pallace cannot spare them,
None but we three?
We three.
We three, well fiue dayes hence.
You haue the time, farwell.
The time I hope for, cannot be conscribde,
Within so short a limit, Rome and I
Are not so happy, what's the reason then
Heauen spares his rod so long? Mercury tell me!
I havt'e: the fruite of pride is yet but greene,
Not mellow, though it grows apace, it comes not
To his ful height: Ioue oft delayes his vengeance,
That when it haps t'may prooue more terrible.
Dispaire not Brutus then but let thy country
And thee take this last comfort after all,
Pride when thy fruite is ripe must rot and fall.
But to the Oracle.
I would I were no Roman.
Cocles why?
I am discontented & dare not speake my thoughts.
What, shall I speake them for you?
Mutius doe.
Tarquin is proude.
Thou hast them.
Tiranous.
True.
Insufferable lofty.
Thou hast hit me.
And shall I tell thee what I prophesie
Or his succeeding rule?
No, lle dooe't for thee, Tarquins abilitie will in the weale,
Beget a weake vnable impotence:
His strength, make Rome and our dominions weake,
His soaring high make vs to flag our winges,
And fly close by the earth, his golden feathers,
Are of such Vastnes that they spread like sailes,
And so becalme vs that we haue not ayre,
Able to raise our plumes, to taste the pleasures of our owne Elements.
We are one harte, our thoughts & our desires are sutable.
Since he was King he beares him like a God,
His wife like Pallas or the wife of Joue,
Will not be parlied without sacrifice,
And homage sole due to the deities.
What hast with good Lucretius,
Hast small speede,
I had an earnest sute vnto the King,
About some busines that concernes the weale
Of Rome and vs, twi'll not be listned to,
He has took evppon him such ambiticus state,
That he abandons conference with his Piers,
Or if he chance to heare our tongus so much,
As but to heare their summons he despises,
The intent of all our speeches, our aduises,
And counsell: thinking his owne iudgement only,
To be aprooued in matters military,
And in affaires domesticke we are but shouts,
And fellowes of no partes, viols vnstrung,
Our notes to harsh to strike in princes eares,
Great Ioue amend it.
VVhither will you my Lord?
No matter where if frō the court, I'le home to Collatine,
And to my daughter Lucrece; home breedes safety,
Dangers begot in Court, a life retierd
Must please me now perforce: then noble Scevola,
And you my deere Horatius, farewell both,
VVhere industrie is scornd lets welcome sloth.
Nay good Lucretius, do not leaue vs thus,
See here comes Collatine, but wheres Valerius?
How does he taste these times?
Not giddily like Brutus, passionately
Like old Lucretius with his teare swoln eies, Not laughing like
Nor bluntly like Horatius Cocles here.
He has vsurpt a stranger garbe of humour,
Distinct from these in natures euery way.
How is he relisht, can his eies forbeare,
In this strange state to shed a passionate teare,
Can he forbeare to laugh with Sceuola,
At that which passionate weeping cannot mend.
Nay can his thought shape ought but melancholy
To see these dangerous passages of state,
How is he tempered noble Collatine?
Strangely, he is all song, hees ditty all,
Note that, Valerius hath giuen vp the Court
And weand himselfe from the kings consistory
In which his sweet harmonious tongue grew harsh,
VVhether it be that he is discontent
Yet would not so appeare before the king
Or whether in applause of these new Edicts,
VVhich so distast the people, or what cause,
I know not but now hee's all musicall.
Vnto the counsell chamber he goes singing,
And whilest the king his wilfull edicts makes,
In which nones tongue is powerfull saue the kings,
Hee's in a corner, relishing strange aires.
Conclusiuely he's frō a toward hopefull gentleman
Transeshapt to a meere balleter, none knowing
Whence should proceed this transitation.
See where he comes. Morrow Valerius.
Morrow my Lord,
The first Song.
When Tarquin first in Court began,
And was approued King:
Some men for sodden ioy gan weepe,
And I for sorrow sing.
Ha, ha, how long has my Valerius
Put on his straine of mirth, or whats the cause?
The second Song.
Let humor change and spare not,
Since Tarquins proud I care not:
His faire words so bewitch my delight,
That I dote on his sight.
Now all is gone, new desires embraceing,
And my deserts disgracing.
Vpon my life he's either mad or loue-sicke,
Oh can Valerius, but so late a states-man,
Of whom the publique weale deseru'd so well
Tune out his age in songs and Cansonets,
Whose voyce should thunder conusell in the eares
Of Tarquin, and proud Tullia? thinke Valerius
What that proud woman Tullia is, twill put thee
Quite out of tune.
The third Song.
Now what is loue I pray thee tell,
It is the fountaine and the well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps the sansing bell,
That rings all in to heauen or hell:
And this is loue, and this is loue, as I heare tell.
Now what is loue I pray you shew,
A thing that creepes and cannot goe:
A prise that passeth to and fro,
A thing for me, a thing, for moe,
And he that proues shall find it so,
And this is loue, and this loue, sweet friends I tro.
Valerius I shall quickly change thy cheere,
And make thy passionate eyes lament with mine,
Thinke how that worthy Prince our kinsman King
Was butchered in the marble capitoll.
Shall Seruius Tullius vnregarded die
Alone of thee, whome all the Romaine Ladies,
Euen yet with teare-swolne eyes, and sorrowful soules
Compassionate, as well he merited;
To these lamenting dames what canst thou sing?
Whose greefe through all the Romaine Temples ring.
The fourth Song.
Lament Ladies lament
Lament the Roman land,
The King is fra thee hent,
Was doughtie on his hand,
Weele gang into the Kirke,
His dead corpes wele embrase,
And when we see him dead
We ay will cry alasse. Fala la lero la
Tararara roun tarre &c.
This musick mads me, I all mirth dispise.
To heare him sing drawes riuers from his eyes.
It pleaseth me, for since the Court is harsh,
And lookes a skaunce on souldiers, lets be merry,
Court Ladies, sing, drinke, dance, and euery man
Get him a mistris, coach it in the Country,
And tast the sweets of it, what thinks Valerius,
Of Sceuolous last councell?
The fift Song.
Why since we souldiers cannot proue,
And greefe it is to vs therefore,
Let euery man get him a loue,
To trim her vp, and fight no more.
That we may tast of louers blisse,
Be merry and blith, imbrace and kisse,
That Ladies may say, some more of this,
That Ladies may say, some more of this. 
Since Court and Country both grow proud,
And safety you delight to heare,
Wee in the Country will vs shroud,
VVhere liues to please both eye and eare
The Nightingale sings Iug, Iug, Iug,
The little Lambe leaps after his dug,
And the prety milke-maids they looke so smug,
And the prety milke-maids, &c.
Come Sceuola, shall we goe and be idle?
Ile in to weep.
But I my gall to grate.
Ile laugh at time, till it will change our Fate.
Thou art not what thou seem'st, Lord Sceuola,
Thy heart mournes in thee, though thy visage smile,
And so doe's thy soule weep, Valerius,
Although thy habit sing, for these new humors
Are but put on for safety, and to arme them
Against the pride of Tarquin, from whose danger,
None great in loue, in counsell or opinion
Can be kept safe: this makes me lose my houres
At home with Lucrece, and abandon court.
Fortune I embrace thee, that thou hast assisted me in finding my master, 
the Gods of good Rome keepe my Lord and master out of all bad company.
Sirra the newes with you.
Would you ha Court newes, Campe newes, City newes or Country newes, 
or would you know whats the newes at home?
Let me know all the newes.
The newes at Court is, that a small legge and a silke stocking are in fashion for your Lord: 
And the water that god Mercury makes is in request with your Ladie. 
The heauinesse of the kings wine makes many a light head, 
and the emptines of his dishes manie full bellies, eating & drinking was neuer more  in vse; 
you shall find the baddest legs in bootes, and the worst faces in maskes. 
They keep their old stomakes still, the kings good Cook hath the most wrong: 
for that which was wont to be priuate only to him, is now vsurpt among all the other officers: 
for now euery man in his place, to the preiudice of the master Cooke, 
makes bold to licke his owne fingers.
The newes in the Campe.
The greatest newes in the camp is, that there is no newes at all, 
for being no camp at all, how can there be any tidings from it?
Then for the Campe.
The Senators are rich, their wiues faire, credit growes cheap and trafficke deare, 
for you have many that are broke, the poorest man that is, may take vp what he will, 
so he will be but bound to a post, till he pay the debt: There was one Courtier, 
lay with twelue mens wiues in the suburbs, and pressing furder 
to make one more cuckold within the walles, and being taken with the maner, 
had nothing to say for himselfe, but this, he that made twelue made thirteene.
Now Sir for the Country.
There is no newes there but at the Ale-house, ther's the most receit, 
and is it not strange my Lord, that so many men loue ale that know not what ale is.
Why, what is ale?
Why ale is a kind of iuice, made of the pretious grain called Malt: & what is Malt? 
Malt's MALT. and what is MALT M much, A ale, L little, T thrift, all is, much ale's, little thrist.
Onely the newes at home, and I haue done.
My lady must needes speake with you about earnest busines, 
that concernes her neerly, and I was sent in all hast to entreat your Lordship to come away.
And couldest thou not haue told me? Lucrece stay,
And I stand trifling here? Fellow, away.
I Mary sir, the way into her were a way worth following,
and thats the reason that so many seruing-men that are familiar with their mistresses, 
haue lost the name of Seruitors, and are now called their Maisters followers. Rest you merry.
O thou sacred God, enspire
The Priests, and with celestiall fire
Shot from thy beames, crowne our desire,
That we may follow.
In these thy true and hallowde measures,
The vtmost of thy heauenly treasures
According to the thoughts and pleasures
Of great Apollo.
Our hearts with inflammations burne
Great Tarquin and his people mourne
Till from thy Temple we returne
With some glad tidings.
Then tell vs, shall great Rome be blest
And roiall Tarquin liue in rest,
That giues his high Ennobled brest
To thy safe guiding?
Then Rome her ancient honours wins
When she is purgd from Tullius sins.
Gramercies Phoebus for these spelles,
Phoebus alone, alone excelles.
Tullia perhaps sinned in our gransiers death
And hath not yet by reconcilement made
Attone with Phoebus, at whose shrine we kneele.
Yet gentle Priest let vs thus farre preuaile,
To know if Tarquins seed shall gouerne Rome
And by succession claime the Royall wreath.
Behold me yonger of the Tarquins Race
This elder Aruns both the sons of Tullia.
This Iunius Brutus though a mad-man yet,
Of the high bloud of Tarquins.
Sextus peace. Tell vs O thou that shin'st so bright
From whom the world receiues his light,
VVhose absence is perpetuall night,
whose praises ring.
Is it with heauens applause decreed,
VVhen Tarquins soule from earth is freed
That noble Sextus shall succeed
In Rome as king.
I Oracle hast thou lost thy tongue?
Tempt him againe faire Priest,
If not as king, let Delphian Phoebus yet
Thus much resolue me who shall gouerne Rome,
Or of vs three, beare greatest preheminence.
Sextus I will, yet sacred Phoebus we entreat,
VVhich of these three shall be great
Which largest power and state repleat
by the heauens doome
Phoebus thy thoughts no longer smother.
He that first shall kisse his mother
Shall be powerfull and no other
Of you three in Rome.
Shall kisse his mother.
Mother earth to thee an humble kisse I tender.
VVhat meanes Brutus?
The bloud of the slaughtred sacrifice made this flore as slippry 
as the place where Tarquin treades, tis glassy and as smoth as yce: 
I was proud to heare the Oracle so gracious to the bloud of the Tarquins and so I fell.
Nothing but so, then to the Oracle.
I charge thee Aruns, Iunus Brutus thee,
To keep the sacred doome of the Oracle
From all our traine, lest when the yonger lad
Our brother now at home, sits dandled
Vpon faire Tulliaes lap, this vnderstanding
May kisse our beauteous Mother and succeed.
Let the charge go round,
It shall go hard but Ile preuent you Sextus.
I feare not the madman Brutus, & for Aruns let me alone to buckle with him, 
I'le bee the first at my mothers lips for a kingdome.
If the mad-man had not beene before you Sextus, if Oracles be Oracles, 
their phrases are mysticall, they speake still in cloudes: had he meant 
a naturall mother he would ha spoke it by circumference.
Tullia, if euer thy lips were pleasing to me, let it be at my returne from the Oracle.
If a kisse will make me a king, Tullia I will spring to thee, though through the bloud of Sextus.
Earth I acknowledge no mother but thee, accept me as thy sonne, 
and I shall shine as bright in Rome as Apollo himselfe in his temple at Delphos.
Our superstitions ended, sacred Priest,
Since we haue had free answer from the Gods,
To whose faire altars we ha done due right
And hallowed them with presents acceptable,
Lets now returne, treading these holy measures,
VVith which we entred great Apolloes temple.
Now Phoebus let thy sweet tun'd organs sound,
VVhose spherelike musicke must direct our feet
Vpon the marble pauement: after this
VVeele gaine a kingdome by a mothers kisse.
Attend vs with your persons, but your eares
Be deafe vnto our counsels.
The Lords fall off on either side and attend.
Further yet.
Now Tuilia what must be concluded next?
The kingdome you haue got by policy
You must maintaine by pride.
Good Tullia.
Those that were late of the Kings faction
Cut off for feare they proue rebellious.
Better.
Since you gaine nothing by the popular loue,
Mainetaine by feare your princedome.
Excellent, thou art our Oracle, and saue from thee
VVe will admit no counsell, we obtaind
Our state by cunning, t'must be kept by strength.
And such as cannot loue, weele teach to feare,
To encourage which vpon a better iudgement,
And to strike greater terror to the world,
I have forbid thy fathers funerall.
No matter.
All capitall causes are by vs discust,
Trauerst and executed without counsell.
We challenge too by our prerogatiue,
The goods of such as striue against our state,
The freest citizens without attaint,
Arraigne or iudgment we to exile doome,
The poorer are our drudges, rich our pray,
And such as dare not striue our rule obey.
Kings are as Gods, and diuine scepters beare,
The Gods command for mortall tribute feare.
But royall Lord, we that despise thir loue,
Must seeke some meanes how to maintaine this awe
By forrenie leagues & by our strength abroad,
Shall we that are degreed aboue our people,
Whom heauen hath made our vassals reigne with them?
No, kings aboue the rest tribunald hie
Should with no meaner, then with kings ally:
For this we to Mamilius Tusculan
The Latine King ha giuen in mariage
Our royall daughter: now his peoples ours,
The neighbour princes are subdude by armes:
And whom we could not conquer by constraint
Them ha we sought to winne by courtesie,
Kings that are proud, yet would secure their owne,
By loue abroad, shall purchase feare at home.
We are secure, then yet our greatest strength
Is in our children: how dare treason looke
Vs in the face, hauing issue? barren princes
Breed danger in their singularity
Hauing none to succeed, their clame dies with them:
But when in topping on three Tarquins more,
Like Hydraes heads grow to reuenge his death,
It terrifies blacke treason.
Tullia's wise, and apprehensiue, were our princely sons
Sextus and Aruns back returned safe,
With an applausiue answer of the Gods,
From th'oracle, our state were able then,
Being Gods our selues, to scorne the hate of men.
Wher's Tullia?
Where's our mother?
Yonder princes at Counsell with the king.
Our sons return'd.
Roiall mother.
Renowned Queene.
I loue her best, therefore will Sextus do his duty first.
Being eldest in my birth i'le not be yongest In zeale to Tullia.
Too't lads.
Mother a kisse.
Though last in birth, let me be first in loue.
A kisse faire mother.
Shall I lose my right?
Aruns Shal downe were Aruns twice my brother
If he presume fore me to kisse my mother.
I Sextus, thinke this kisse to be a crowne, thus wold we tug fort.
Aruns thou must downe.
Restraine them Lords.
Nay to't boies, ô tis braue, they tug for shadowes, I the substance haue.
Through armed gates, and thousand swords il'e breake
To shew my duty, let my valour speake.
Oh heauens ye haue dissolu'd me.
Here I stand, what I ha done to answer with this hand.
Oh all you Delphian Gods looke downe and see,
How for these wrongs I will reuenged be.
Curb in the proud boyes fury: let vs know
From whence this discord riseth.
From our loue, how happy are we in our issue now,
When as our sons, euen with their blouds contend,
To exceed in duty we accept your zeale,
This your superlatiue degree of kindnes
So much preuailes with vs, that to the king
We engage our owne deere loue twixt his incensement,
And your presumption, you are pardond both.
And Sextus though you faild in your first proffer,
We do not yet esteeme you least in loue, ascend & touch our lips
Thanke you, no.
Then to thy knee we will descend thus low
Nay now it shall not need: how great's my heart!
In Tarquins crowne thou hast now lost thy part.
No kissing now, Tarquin, great Queene adiew:
Aruns On earth we ha no foe but you.
What meanes this their vnnaturall emnity?
hate borne from loue.
Resolue vs then, how did the Gods accept
Our sacrifice, how are they pleasd with vs.
How long will they applaud our soueraignty?
Shall I tell the king.
Do Cosen, with the processe of your iorny.
I will. We went from hither, when we went from hence, 
arriued thither when we landed there, made an end of our 
praiers when we had done our Orisons, when thus quoth Phoebus,
Tarquin shall be happy whilest he is blest, gouerne while he raignes, 
wake when he sleeps not, sleepe when he wakes not, quaffe when he drinkes, 
eate when he feedes, gape when his mouth opens, liue till he die, 
and die when he can liue no longer. So Phoebus commends him to you.
Mad Brutus still, Son Aruns What say you.
That the great Gods to whom the potent king
Of this large Empire, sacrific'd by vs,
Applaud your raigne, commend your soueraignty:
And by a generall Synode grant to Tarquin,
Long daies, faire hopes, Maiestique gouernment.
Adding withall, that to depose the late king, which in
others, had bin arch treason, in Tarquin was honour: what in
Brutus had beene vsurpation, in Tarquin was lawful succession
and for Tullia, though it be parricide for a child to kil her father,
in Tullia it was charitie by death.
To rid him of all his calamities, Phoebus himselfe, said she, was a good child, 
and shall not I say as he saies, to tread vpon her fathers skull, 
sparkle his braines vpon her chariot wheele,
And weare the sacred tincture of his bloud
Vpon the seruile shoe? but more then this,
After his death deny him the due claime
Of all mortality, a funerall,
An earthen sepulcher: this this, quoth the Oracle,
Saue Tullia none would doe.
Brutus no more, lest with our surpast eies of wrath & fury
We looke into the humour; were not madnes
And folly to thy words a priuilege
Euen in thy last reproofe of our proceedings
Thou hadst pronounc't thy death.
If Tullia will send Brutus abroad for newes, and after at his returne not endure the telling of it; 
let Tullia either get closer eares, or get for Brutus a stricter tongue. God boye.
Alas tis madnes, pardon him, not spleene,
Nor is it hate, but frensie, we are pleasde
To heare the Gods propitious at our prayers.
But withers Sextus gone? resolue vs Cocles,
We saw thee in his parting follow him.
I heard him say, he would straight take his horse
Vnto the warlike Gabines enemies.
To Rome and you, saue them we haue no opposites.
And dares the boy, confederate with our foes?
Attend vs Lords, we must new battels wage,
And with bright armes confront the proud boyes rage.
Had I as many soules as drops of bloud
In this brancht vaines, as many liues as starres
Stucke in yond azare roofe, and were to dy
More deathes then I see wasted weary minuts,
To grow to this, Ide hazard all, and more,
To purchase freedome to this bondag'd Rome.
I'me vext to see this virgin conqueresse weare shackles in my fight.
Oh would my teares would rid great Rome of these prodigious feares.
What weeping ripe Lucretius? Possible? now Lords, Ladies, friends, fellows, 
yong madcap, gallāts & old courtly ruffins, al subiects vnder one tirāny, 
& therfore shold be partners of one & the same vnanimity. Shall we go single our 
selues by two & two, & go talke treason? then tis but his yea, and my nay, 
if we be cal'd to question: Or shals go vse some violent bustling to breake
through this thorny seruitude, or shall we euery man go sit like a man in desperation, 
and with Lucretius weep at Romes misery: now am I for all things, any thing or nothing, 
I can laugh with Sceuola, weep with this good old man, sing oh onhe hone 
with Valerius, fret with Horatius Cocles, be mad like my selfe, neutrize with Collatine. 
Say what shal's do?
fret.
Sing.
Weepe.
Laugh.
Rather lets all be mad that Tarquin stil raigneth, Romes still sad.
You are madmen all that yeeld so much to passion.
You lay your selues too open to your enemies,
That would be glad to prie into your deedes,
And catch aduantage to ensnare our liues.
The kings feare like a shadow dogs you still,
Nor can you walke without it: I commend
Valerius most, and noble Sceuola
That what they cannot mend, seeme not to mind,
By my consent lets all weare out our houres
In harmles sports, hauke, hunt, game, sing, drinke, daunce,
So shall we seeme offenseles & liue safe.
In dangers bloudy iawes where being humerous, 
Cloudy and curiously inquisitiue.
Into the kings proceedings there armde feare
May search into vs, call our deedes to question,
And so preuent all future expectation:
Of wisht amendment let vs stay the time,
Till heauen haue made them ripe for iust reuenge,
When opportunitie is offred vs.
And then strike home, till then do what you please:
No discontented thought my mind shall cease.
I am of Collatines minde. Now Valerius sing vs a baudy song. 
and makes merry, nay it shall be so.
Brutus shall pardon me.
The time that should haue been seriously spent in the State house, 
I ha learnt securely to spend in a wenching house, 
and now I professe my selfe any thing but a States-man.
the more thy vanity.
The lesse thy honour.
The more his safety, and the lesse his feare.
We ha beene mad Lords long, now let vs be merry Lords, Horatins maugree thy 
melancholy, and Lucretius in spight of thy sorrow, Ile haue a song a subiect for the ditty.
Great Tarquins pride, and Tulliaes cruelty.
Dangerous, no.
The tyrannies of the Court, & the vassalage of the City.
Neither shall I giue the subiect.
Do, & let it be of all the prety wenches in the Suburbs of Rome.
It shall, it shall, shall it Valerius?
Any thing, according to my poore acquaintance, & little conuersance.
Nay you shall stay Horatius, Lucretius so shall you, he remoues himselfe 
from the loue of Brutus, that shrinkes from my side till 
we haue had a song of all the prety suburbians: sit round, when Valerius?
Shall I woe the louely Molly,
Shee's so faire, so fat, so iolly,
But she has a tricke of folly,
Therefore I'll ha none of Molly. No no no, no no no.
Ile haue none of Molly no no no.
Oh the cherry lips of Nelly,
They are red and soft as ielly,
But too well she loues her belly,
therfore ile haue none of Nelly. No no &c.
What say you to bonny Betty,
Ha you seene a lasse to pretty?
But her body is so swetty,
Therefore ile ha none of Bety. No no no, &c.
When I dolly with my Dolly,
She is full of melancholly
Oh that wench is pestilent holy,
Therefore ile haue none of Dolly. No no no, &c.
I could fancie louely Nanny,
But she has the loues of many,
Yet her selfe she loues not any,
Therefore ile haue none of Nanny, No no no, &c.
In a flax-shop I spide Ratchel,
Where she her flax and tow did hachel,
But her cheekes hang like a satchell.
Therefore ile ha none of Ratchel. No no no, &c.
In a corner I met Biddy,
Her heeles were light her head was giddy,
She fell downe and somewhat did I,
Therefore ile haue none of Biddy. No no no, &c.
The rest weele heare within: what offence is there in this Lucretius, 
what hurt's in this Horatius? Is it not better to sing with our heads on 
then weepe with our heads off, I nere tooke Collatine for a polititian till now. 
Come Valerius, weele run ouer all the wenches of Rome, 
euen from the community of lasciuious Flora to the chastity 
of diuine Lucrece, come good Horat.
A Chaire.
A chaire for my Lady, Mrs. Mirable do you not heare my Mrs call.
Come neere sir, be lesse officious.
In duty, and vse more attention,
Nay gentlewoman we exempt not you
From our discourse, but you must afford an eare
As well as he, to what we ha to say.
I still remaine your handmaid.
Sirra I ha seene you oft familiar
With this my Maid and waiting gentlewoman.
As casting amorous glances, wanton lookes,
And pretty beckes, sauouring incontinence.
I let you know you are not for my seruice
Vnlesse you grow more ciuill.
Indeed madam for my owne part I wish MrsMirable wel as one fellow 
seruāt ought to wish to another, but to say that euer 
I flung any sheepes eies in her face, how say you mistresse Mirable did I euer offer it?
Nay mistres I ha seene you answere him
With gracious lookes and some vnciuill smiles,
Retorting eies, and giuing his demeanure
Such welcome as becomes not modesty.
Know henceforth there shall no lasciuious phrase,
Suspitious looke or shadow of incontinence
Be entertaind by any that attend on Romane Lucrece.
Madam I.
Excuse it not, for my premeditable thought
Speakes nothing out of rashnes, nor vaine hearesay.
But what my owne experience testifies:
Against you both let then this mild reproofe
Forewarne you of the like, my reputation
Which is held pretious in the eies of Rome,
Shall be no shelter to the least intent
Of loosenes, leaue all familiarity:
And quite renounce acquaintance, or I here discharge you both my seruice.
For my owne part madam, as I am a true Romane by nature, though no Romane by my nose, 
I neuer spent the least lip labour on mistris Mirable neuer so much as glaunc'd, 
neuer vs'd any winking or pinking, neuer nodded at her, no not so much as 
when I was asleep neuer askt her the questiō so much as whats her name, 
if you can bring any man womā or child, that can say so much behind my backe; 
As for he did but kisse her, for he did but kisse her and so let her go, let my Lord Callatine 
in stead of plucking my coat, pluck my skin ouer my eares & turne me away naked, 
that wheresoeuer I shall come I may be held a raw seruingman hereafter.
Sirra you know our minde.
If euer I knew what bolongs to these cases, or yet know what they meane, 
if euer I vsed any plaine dealing, or were euer worth such a iewell, would I might die a begger, 
if euer I were so far read in my grammar, as to know what an Interiection is, 
or a coniunction copulatiue, would I might neuer haue good of my qui qua quod:
why do you thinke madam, I haue no more care of my selfe being but a stripling, then 
to go to it at these yeares? flesh and bloud cannot endure it, I shall euen spoile  
one of the best faces in Rome with crying at your vnkindnes.
I ha done, see if you can spy your Lord rerurning from the Court, and giue me 
notice what strangers he brings home with him.
Yes Ile go, but see kind man he saues me a labour.
Faire Lucrece, I ha brought these Lords from Court
To feast with thee, sirra prepare vs dinner.
My Lord is welcom, so are all his friends, the newes at Court Lords?
Madam strange newes: Prince Sextus by the enemies of Rome
Was nobly vsde and made their Generall,
Twice hath he met his father in the field,
And foild him by the warlick Gabines aid:
But how hath he rewarded that braue Nation,
That in his great disgrace supported him?
Ile tell you Madam, he since the last battell
Sent to his father a close messenger
To be receiu'd to grace, withall demanding
What he should doe with those his enemies:
Great Tarquin from his son receiues this newes,
Being walking in his Garden, when the messenger
Importunde him for answere, the proud king
Lops with his wand the heads of poppies off,
And saies no more, with this vncertain answere
The messenger to Sextus back returnes.
who questions of his fathers words, lookes, gesture,
He tels him what the hawty speechles King
Did to the heads of poppies, which bold Sextus
Straight apprehends, cuts off the great mens heads,
And hauing left the Gabines without Gouernors,
Flies to his father, and this day is welcom'd
For this his trayterous seruice, by the King
With all due solemne honours to the Court.
Curtefie strangely requited, this none but the sonne of Tarquin would euer haue enterpris'de.
I like it, I applaud it, this will come to somwhat in the end, when heauen 
has cast vp his account, some of them will be cald to a hard reckoning.
Leaue all to heauen.
My Lords, the best plum poredge in all Rome cooles for your honors,
dinner is piping hot vpō the table: & if you make not the more hast, you are like 
to haue but cold cheare, the cook hath done his part, & ther's not a dish vpō the dresser 
but he has made smoake for you, if you haue good stomackes, and come not 
in while the meat is hot, you'le make hunger and cold meet together.
My man's a Rhetorician I can tell you,
And this conceit is fluent. Enter Lords,
You must be Lucrece guests, and she is scant
In nothing: for such princes must not want.
My Lord Valerius, I haue euen a suit to your honour, I ha not the power to part from you, without a relish, a note, a tone, we must get an aire betwixt vs.
Thy meaning.
Nothing but this, Iohn for the king, has bin in many ballads, Iohn for the king downe 
dino, Iohn for the king, has eaten many sallats Iohn for the king sings hey ho.
Thou wouldst haue a song, wouldst thou not?
And be euerlastingly bound to your honour, I am now forsaking the world and the Diuill, 
and somewhat leaning towards the flesh, if you could but teach me how to choose a wench
fit for my stature and complection, I should rest yours in all good offices.
Ile do that for thee, what's thy name?
My name sir is Pompie.
Well then attend,
The seuenth song.
Pompie I will shew thee the waie to know
A daintie dapper wench
First see her all bare, let her skin be rare,
And be toucht with no part of the french:
Let her eye be cleare, and her brow seuere,
Her eie-browes thin and fine:
But if she be a punke, and loue to be drunke,
Then keep her still from the wine.
Let her stature be mean, & her body cleane
Thou canst not choose but like her.
But see she ha good clothes, with a faire Romane nose,
For thats the signe of a striker.
Let her legs be small, but not vs'd to sprall,
Her tongue not too lowd nor cocket,
Let her armes be strong and her fingers long.
But not vs'd to diue in a pocket.
Let her body be long and her backe be strong,
With a soft lip that entangles,
With an iuory brest, and her haire well dresst
Without goldlace or spangles.
Let her foot be small, cleane legd withall,
Her apparell not too gaudy:
And one that hath not bin, in no house of sin,
Nor place that hath beene bawdy.
But gods me, I am trifling heere with thee, & dinner cooles o'th table, & I am cald to my attendance, oh my sweet Lord Valerius.
Next king Porsenna, whom we tender deerely,
Welcome yong Sextus, thou hast to our yoake,
Supprest the necke of a proud nation
The warlike Gauines, enemies to Rome.
It was my duty royall Emperour,
The duty of a subiect and a son.
We at our mothers intercession likewise,
Are now aton'd with Aruns, whō we here receiue into our bosom
This is done like a kind brother and a naturall son.
VVe enterchange a royall heart with Sextus & graft vs in your loue.
Now king Porsenna, welcome once more, to Tarquin and to Rome.
VVe are proud of your aliance, and Rome is ours,
And we are Romes, this our religious league,
Shall be caru'd firme in characters of brasse,
And liue for euer to succeeding times.
It shall Porsenna, now this leagues establisht,
We will proceede in our determinde warres
To bring the neighbor Nations vnder vs.
Our purpose is to make young Sextus Generall
Of all our army, who hath prou'd his fortunes
And found them full of fauour, weele begin
With strong Ardea, ha you giuen in charge
To assemble all our Captaines, & take muster of our strōg army?
That busines is dispatcht.
Wee ha likewise sent for all our best commanders to take charge
According to their merit, Lord Valerius,
Lord Brutus, Cocles, Mutius, Sceuola,
And Collatine to make due preparation of such a gallant siege.
This day you shall set forward, Sextus go,
And let vs see your army march along
Before this King and vs, that we may view
The puissance of our host prepar'd already,
To lay high-reard Ardea waste and lowe.
I shall my liege.
Aruns associate him.
A riuall with my brother in his honors.
Porsenna shall behold the strength of Rome,
And bodie of the Camp vnder the charge
Of two braue Princes to lay hostile siege
Against the strongest citie that withstands
The all commanding Tarquin.
Tis an obiect, to please Porsennaes Eie. 
The host is now vpon his march,
You from this place may see,
The pride of all the Roman chiualry.
This sight's more pleasing to Porsennaes eye,
Then all our rich Attalia pompous feasts,
Or sumptuous Reuels: we are borne a soldier:
And in our nunnage suckt the milke of warre.
Should any strange fate lowre vpon this army,
Or that the merciles gulfe of confusion
Should swallow them, we at our proper charge,
And from our natiue confines vow supply
Of men and Armes to make these numbers full.
You are our Royall brother, and in you
Tarquin is powerfull and maintaines his awe.
The like Porsenna may command of Rome.
But we haue in your fresh varieties
Feasted too much, and kept our selfe too long
From our stone seate, our prosperous returne
Hath bin expected by our Lords and Pieres.
The busines of our warres thus forwarded,
We ha best leisure for our entertainment,
Which now shall want no due solemnitie.
It hath bin beyond both expectation
And merit, but in sight of heauen I sweare
If euer royall Tarquin shall demand
Vse of our loue, tis ready stor'de for you,
Euen in our Kingly breast.
The like we vow, to King Porsenna, we wil yet a little
Enlarge your royall welcome with Rarieties,
Such as Rome yeelds: that done before we part
Of two remote dominions make one heart.
Set forwards then, our sons wage warre abroad,
To make vs peace at home, we are of our selfe
Without supportance, we all fate defy,
Aidlesse, and of our selfe we stand thus hy.
Stand, who goes there?
A friend.
Stir not, for if thou dost Ile broch thee straight vpon the pike, The word.
Porsenna.
Passe, stay, who walkes the round to night,
The Generall, or any of his Captaines?
Horatius hath the charge, the other Chieftens
Rest in the Generals tent, theres no commander
Of any note but reuell with the Prince:
And I among the rest am chargd to attend
Vpon their Rouse.
Passe freely, I this night must stand,
Twixt them and danger, the time of night.
The clocke last told eleuen.
The powers celestiall, that ha tooke Rome in charge protect it still.
Againe good night, thus must poore Souldiers do,
Whilest their commanders are with dainties fed,
They sleep on Downe, the earth must be our bed.
Sit round, the enemy is pounded fast
In their owne folds, the wals made to oppugne,
Hostile incursions become a prison
To keep them fast for excution;
Ther's no eruption to be feard.
What shals do? come a health to the Generals health, & Valerius 
that sits the most ciuilly shall begin it, I cannot talke till my bloud be mingled 
with this bloud of grapes: Fill, for Valerius thou shouldst drinke well, 
for thou hast been in the German warres, if thou loust me, drinke vpse freeze.
Nay, since Brutus has spoke the word, the first health shal be impos'd on 
you Valerius, and if euer you haue bin germanised, let it be after the Dutch fashion.
The Generall may command.
He may, why else is he cald the Commander?
We will intreat Valerius.
Since you wil needes enforce a hie-German health, looke well to your heads, 
for I come vpon you with this dutch Tassaker, if you were of a more noble science then you are,
it will go neere to breake your heads round.
O Morke gyff men ein man,
Skerry merry vip,
O morke gyff men ein man
Skerry merry vap.
O morke gyff men ein man,
that tik die scine long o drieuan can;
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap,
and skerry merry runke ede bunk,
Ede hoore was a haie dedle downe
Deale drunke a:
Skerry merry runk, ede bunk, ede hoor was drunk a
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene
Skerry merry vip,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Skerry merry vap,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Ye molten slop, ein yere a leene
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap
And skerry merry runk ede bunk
Ede hoore was a bay dedle downe
Dedle drunk a:
Skerry merry, runk ede bunke ede hoor was drunk a.
Gramercies Valerius, came this hie-German health 
as double as his double double ruffe, i'de pledge it.
Were it in Lubeckes or double double beere their owne naturall liquor i'de pledge it, 
were it as deep as his ruffe, let the health go round about the board as 
his band goes round about his necke, I am no more afraid of this dutch fauchiō, 
thē I should be of the heathenish inuention.
I must entreat you spare me, for my braine brookes not the fumes of wine, 
their vaporous strength offends me much.
I would haue none spare me, for ile spare none, Collatine 
will pledge no health vnlesse it be to his Lucrece.
What's Lucrece but a woman, and what are women
But tortures and disturbance vnto men.
If they be foule th'are odious, and if faire,
Th'are like rich vessels ful of poysnous drugs,
Or like black serpents arm'd with golden scales,
For my owne part, they shall not trouble me.
Sextus, sit fast, for I proclaime my selfe a womans chāpion, and shall vnhorse thee else.
For my owne part, Ime a marride man, and Ile speake to my wife to thanke thee Brutus.
I haue a wife too, and I thinke, the most vertuous Lady in the world.
I cannot say but that I haue a good wife too, & I loue her: but if she were in heauen, 
beshrew me if I would wish her so much hurt as to desire her cōpany vpon 
earth agin, yet vpō my honour, though she be not very faire, she is exceeding honest.
Nay the lesse beautie the lesse temptation to dispoile her honesty.
I should be angry with him that should make question of her honour.
And I angry with thee if thou shouldst not maintaine her honour.
If you compare the vertues of your wiues, let me step in for mine.
I should wrong my Lucrece not to stand for her.
Ha, ha, all captens, and stand vpon the honesty of your
wiues, ist possible thinke you, that women of young spirit and full age,
Of fluent wit, that can both sing and dance,
Reade, write, such as feede well and taste choice cates,
That straight dissolue to purity of blood,
That keep the veines full, and enflame the appetite,
Making the spirit able, strong and prone,
Can such as these their husbands being away
Emploid in forreine sieges or elsewhere,
Deny such as importune them at home?
Tell me that flax wil not be toucht with fire,
Nor they be won to what they most desire.
Shall I end this controuersie in a word?
Do good Brutus.
I hold some holy but some apt to sin,
Some tractable, but some that none can winne,
Such as are vertuous, Gold nor wealth can moue,
Some vicious of themselues are prone to loue.
Some Grapes are sweete and in the Gardens grow,
Others vnprunde, turne wild neglected so.
The purest oare containes both Gold and drosse,
The one all gaine, the other nought but losse.
The one disgrace, reproch and scandall taints,
The other angels and sweete featurde saints.
Such is my vertuous Lucrece.
Yet for her vertue, not comparable to the wife of Aruns.
And why may not mine be rāckt with the most vertuous?
I would put in for a lot, but 1000 to one I shall draw but a blancke.
I should not shew I lou'd my wife, not to take her part in her absence, I hold her inferior to none.
Saue mine.
No, not to her.
Oh this were a braue controuersie for a Iury of weomen to arbitrate.
Ile hazard all my fortunes on the vertues
Of diuine Lucrece, shall we try them thus?
It is now dead of night, lets mount our steeds,
Within this two houres we may reach to Rome,
And to our houses all come vnpreparde,
And vnexpected by our hy praisd wives,
She of them al that we finde best imploid,
Deuoted and most huswife exercised,
Let her be held most vertuous, and her husband
Win by the wager a good horse and armour.
A hand on that.
Heres a helping hand to that bargaine.
But Shal we to horse without circumstance?
Sceuola will be mounted with the first.
Then moūt, Cheuall Brutus, this night take you the charge of the army, 
Ile see the triall of this wager, 'twould do me good to see some of them 
find their wiues in the armes of their louers, they are so confident in their vertues, 
Brutus weele enterchange, good night within, be thou but as prouident ore the army as we 
(if our horses faile not) expeditious in our iorney, horse, horse, horse.
But one houre more & you shall all to rest,
Now that your Lord is absent from this house,
And that the Masters eie is from his charge,
We must be carefull and with prouidence
Guide his domestick busines, we ha now
Giuen ore all feasting and leaud reuelling,
Which ill becomes the house whose Lord is absent,
We banish all excesse til his returne,
In feare of whom my soule doth daily mourne.
Madam so please you to repose your selfe
Within your Chamber, leaue vs to our taskes,
We will not loiter though you take your rest.
Not so, you shall not ouerwatch your selues
Longer then I wake with you: for it fits
Good huswifes when their husbands are frō home,
To ey their seruants labors and in care,
And the true manage of his houshold state,
Earliest to rise, and to be vp most late.
Since all his busines he commits to me,
Ile be his faithfull steward til the camp
Dissolue and he returne, thus wiues should doe,
In absence of their Lords be husband too.
Madam the Lord Turnus his man was thrice for you here to haue entreated you home to supper, 
he saies his L. takes it vnkindly he could not haue your company.
To please a louing husband, Ile offend
The loue and patience of my dearest friend,
Me thinkes his purpose was vnreasonable
To draw me in my husbands absence forth
To feast and banquet, twould haue ill becomd me,
To ha left the charge of such a spacious house, without both L. & Mistres,
I am opiniond thus, wiues should not stray,
Out of their dores their husbāds being away: L. Turnus shal excuse me.
Pray Madam set me right into my worke,
Being abroad I may forget the charge.
Imposde me by my L. or be compeld
To stay out late, which were my husband here,
Might be without distast, but he from hence,
Which late abroad, there can no excuse dispence.
Here take your worke againe, a while proceede,
And then to bed, for whilst you sow, Ile read.
I would haue hazsarded all my hopes, my wife had not beene so late a reuelling.
Nor mine at this time of night a gamboling.
They weare so much corke vnder their heeles, they cannot choose but loue to caper.
Nothing does me good, but that if my wife were watching all theirs were wantoning, 
and if I ha lost, none can brag of their winnings.
Now Collatine to yours, either Lucrece must bee better imploid then the rest, 
or you content to haue her vertues ranckt with the rest.
I am pleasd.
Soft, soft, lets steale vpon her as vpon the rest, lest hauing some watchword at our ariual, 
we may giue her notice to be better prepar'd, nay by your leaue 
Collatine, weel limit you no aduātage.
See Lords, thus Lucrece reuels with her maids, In stead of Riot quaffing 
& the practise of hy lavolties to the rauishing sound of chambring musique, 
she like a good huswife Is teaching of her husband sundry chares. Lucrece?
My L. & husband welcom, 10 times welcom.
Is it to see your Lucrece you thus late
Ha with your persons so hazard left the camp,
And trusted to the danger of a night so darke, and full of horror?
Lords all's lost.
By Ioue, Ile buy my wife a wheele and make her spin for this trick.
If I make not mine learne to liue by the prick of her needle for this, I'm no Roman.
Sweete wife salute these Lords, thy continence
Hath won thy husbād a Barbarian horse, & a rich cote of armes.
O pardon me, the ioy to see my Lord,
Tooke from me all respect of their degrees,
The richest entertainment liues with vs,
According to the houre and the prouision
Of a poore wife in the absence of her husband:
We prostrate to you howsoeuer meane,
We thus excusde, Lord Collatine away,
We neither feast, dance, quaffe, riot nor play.
If one woman among so many bad, may be found good, 
If a white wench may proue a black swan, it is Lucrece,  
her beauty hath relation to her vertue, and her vertue correspondence to her beautie, 
and in both she is fellowlesse.
Lords wil you yeeld the wager?
Stay, the wager was as well which of our wiues was fairest too, 
it stretcht aswell to their beautie as to their continence, who shall iudge that?
That can none of vs, because we are all parties, let Prince 
Sextus determin it who hath bin with vs, and bin an ey witnesse of their beauties.
Agreed.
I am pleasd with the censure of P. Sextus.
So are wee all.
I commit my Lucrece wholly to the censure of Sextus.
And Sextus commits him wholy to the dispose of Lucrece.
I loue the Lady and her grace desire,
Nor can my loue wrong what my thought admire.
Aruns, no question but your wife is chaste,
And thrifty, but this Lady knowes no wast.
Valerius, yours is modest something faire,
Her Grace and beautie are without compare,
Thine Mutius well dispos'd and of good feature,
But the world yeelds not so diuine a creature.
Horatius, thine a smug lasse and grac't well.
But amongst all bright Lucrece doth excel.
Then our impertiall harts and iudging eies,
This verdit gives, faire Lucrece wins the prise.
Then Lords you are indebted to me a horse and armour.
We yee'd it.
Wil you taste such welcom Lords, as a poore vnprouided house can yeeld?
Gramercie Lucrece, no, we must this night sleepe by Ardea walles.
I but my Lords, I hope my Collatine will not so leaue his Lucrece.
He must, we haue but idled from the Camp, to try a merry wager about their wiues, 
and tis the hazard of the kings displeasure, should any man be missing from his charge: 
the powers that gouern Rome make diuine Lucrece for euer happy, goodnight.
Will not my husband repose this night with vs?
Lucrece shall pardon him, we ha tooke our leaues of our wiues, 
nor shall Collatine be before vs, though our Ladies in other things come behind you.
I must be swaid: the ioies and the delights of many thousand nights meet 
all in one to make my Lucrece happy.
I am bound to your strict wil, to each goodnight.
To horse, to horse, Lucrece we cannot rest,
Til our hot lust imbosome in thy brest.
With no vnkindnes we should our Lords vpbraid,
Husbands and Kings must alwaies be obaid.
Nothing saue the high busines of the state,
And the charge giuen him at Ardeas siege,
Could ha made Collatine so much digresse
From the affection that he beares his wife.
But subiects must excuse when kings claime power.
But leauing this before the charme of sleepe,
Cease with his downy wings vpon my eies,
I must go take account among my seruants
Of their daies taske, we must not cherish sloth,
No couetous thought makes me thus prouident,
But to shun idlenes, which wise men say,
Begets ranck lust, and vertue beats away.
Returne to Rome, now we are in the mid way to the Cāp?
My Lords tis busines that concernes my life,
To morrow if we liue weele visit thee.
Wil Sextus enioyne me to accompany him?
Or me?
Nor you, nor any, tis important busines
And serious occurrences that call me,
Perhaps Lords Ile commend you to your wiues.
Colatine shall I doe you any seruice to your Lucrece?
Only commend me.
What, no priuat token to purchase our kind welcom?
Would Roiall Sextus would but honor me to beare her a slight token.
What?
This Ring.
As I am Royall I wil see't deliuered.
This Ring to Lucrece shall my loue conuey,
And in this gift thou dost thy bed betray.
To morrow we shall meete, this night sweet fate,
May I proue welcome though a guest ingrate.
Hees for the city, we for the campe, the night makes the way tedious and melancholy, 
prethee Valerius a merry song to beguile it.
There was a yong man and a maid fell in loue,
Terry dery ding, terry dery ding, tery tery dino.
To get her good will he often did,
Terry dery ding, terry dery ding, langtido dille.
Theres many will say, and most will alow, terry dery, &c.
Thers nothing so good as a terry dery dery dery, &c.
I would wish all maides before they be sicke, terrie derie, &c.
To enquire for a yong man that has a good terrie dery, &c.
Good Valerius, this has brought vs euen to the skirts of the campe, enter Lords.
This ring, my Lord, hath opt our gates to you,
For though I know you for a royall Prince,
My soueraignes sonne, and friend to Collatine:
Without that key you had not entred here.
More lights, and see a banquet strait prouided,
My loue to my deere husband shall appeare,
In the kind welcome that I giue his friend.
Not loue-sicke, but loue lunatike, loue-mad,
I am all fire, impatience, and my bloud
Boyles on my heart, with loose and sensuall thoughts.
A chaire for the Prince, may't please your highnes sit.
Madam, with you.
It will become the wife of Collatine to waite vpon your trencher.
You shall sit, behind vs at the campe we left our state,
We are but your guest, indeed you shall not waite,
Her modestie hath such strong power ore me,
And such a reuerence hath fate giuen her brow,
That it appeares a kind of blasphemy,
To haue any wanton word harsh in her eares,
I cannot woo, and yet I loue boue measure,
Tis force, not suite, must purchase this rich treasure.
Your highnesse cannot taste such homely cates.
Indeed I cannot feed, but on thy face,
Thou art the banquet that my thoughts embrace.
Knew you, my Lord, what free and zelous welcome
We tender you, your highnesse would presume
Vpon your entertainement; oft, and many times
I haue heard my husband speake of Sextus worth,
Extoll your worth, praise your perfection,
I, dote vpon your valor, and your friendship prise next his Lucrece.
Oh impious lust, in all things base, respectles & vniust,
Thy vertue, grace and fame I must enioy,
Though in the purchase I all Rome destroy.
Madame, if I be welcome, as your vertue bids me presume I am,
Carouse to me a health vnto your husband.
A womans draught my Lord, to Collatine.
Nay, you must drinke off all.
Your grace must pardon the tender weaknesse of a womans braine.
It is to Collatine.
Me thinks twould ill become the modesty
Of any Romane Lady to carouse,
And drowne her vertues in the iuice of grapes.
How can I shew my loue to my husband,
To do his wife such wrong, by too much wine
I might neglect the charge of this great house,
Left soly to my keepe, else my example
Might in my seruants breed encouragement
So to offend, both which were pardonlesse,
Else to your grace I might neglect my duty,
And slacke obeysance to so great a guest:
All which being accidentall vnto wine,
Oh let me not so wrong my Collatine.
We excuse you, her imperfections like a torrent
With violence breakes vpon me, and at once
Inuert and swallow all thats good in me.
Preposterous fates, what mischiefes you inuolue
Vpon a captiue Prince left to the fury
Of all grand mischiefe, hath the grandame world
Yet smothred such a strange abortiue wonder,
That from her vertues should arise my sinne:
I am worse then whats most ill, depriude all reason,
My hart all firie lust, my soule all treason.
My Lord, I feare your health, your changing brow
Hath shewne so much disturbance, noble Sextus,
Hath not your ventrous trauell from the campe,
Nor the moyst rawnes of these humorous night impairde your health?
Diuinest Lucrece no. I cannot eate.
To rest then, a ranke of torches there, attend the Prince.
Madam, I doubt I am a guest this night
Too troublesome, and I offend your rest.
This ring speakes for me, that next Collatine you are to me most welcome, 
yet my Lord, thus much presume, without this from his hand, Sextus,
this night could not haue entred here, no, not the king himself, my dores 
the day time to my frinds are frēe, But in the night the obdure gates are lesse kind,
Without this ring they cā no entrāce find. Lights for the Prince.
A kisse and so godnight, nay for your rings sake deny not that
Ioue giue your Highnes soft and sweet repose.
And thee the like, repose with sweet content,
My vowes are fixt, my thoughts on mischiefe bent.
Tis late, so many starres shine in this roome.
By reason of this great and princely guest,
The world might call our modesty in question,
To reuell thus our husband at the Campe,
Hast and to rest, saue in the Princes chamber,
Let not a light appeare, my hart's all sadnesse,
Ioue vnto thy protection I commit
My chastitie and honour to thy keepe,
My waking soule I giue whilst my thoughts sleepe
Soft, soft, not to loud, imagine we were now going on the ropes with egs at our heeles, 
he that hath but a creeking shooe, I wold he had a creek in his neck, 
tread not too hard for disturbing Prince Sextus.
I wonder the P. would ha none of vs stay in his chamber & helpe him to bed.
What an asse art thou to wonder, there may be many causes 
thou knowest the Prince is a soldier, & soldiers many times want shift, 
who can say whether he haue a cleane shirt on or no? for any thing that 
we know he hath vsde staues aker a late, or hath tane a medcin to kill the itch, 
whats that to vs, we did our duty to proffer our seruice.
And what should we enter farther into his thoughts? come, shals to bed? 
Ime as drousie as a doremouse, & my head's as heavy as though I had a nightcap of lead on:
And my eies begin to glew themselues together, I was til supper was done altogether
for your repast, and now after supper I am onely for your repose. 
I think for the two vertues of eating and sleeping, there's neuer 
a Roman spirit vnder the cope, can put me downe.
For shame what a conjuing and catter-walling keep you heere, 
that my Lady cannot sleepe: you shall haue her call by and by, 
and send you all to bed with a witnes.
Sweete mistris Myrable, we are going.
You are too lowde: come, euerie man dispose him to his rest and ile to mine.
Out with your Torches sir.
Come then, and euerie man sneake into his kennell
Night, be as secret as thou art close, as close
as thou art black and darke, thou ominous Quuene
Of Tenebrous, filence, make this fatall hower,
as true to Rape as thou hast made it kinde
To murder and harsh mischiefe: Cinthea, maske thy cheeke,
And all you sparkling Elamentall fires,
Choke vp your beauties in prodigious fogges,
Or be extinct in some thick vaparous clowde,
Least you beholde my practise: I am bound
Vpon a blacke aduenture, on a deede
That must wound vertue, and make beautie bleede.
Pause Sextus, and before thou runst thy selfe
Into this violent danger, weigh thy sinne,
Thou art yet free, belou'd, grac'd in the Campe,
Of great opinion and vndoubted hope,
Romes darling in the vniuersall grace,
Both of the field, and senate: were these fortunes
To make thee great in both, backe yet, thy fame
Is free from hazard, and thy stile from shame.
Of fate, thou hast vsurpt such power ouer man,
That where thou pleadst thy will, no mortall can.
On then, black mischiefe hurrie me the way.
My selfe I must destroy, her life betray,
The state of King and Subiect, the displeasure
Of Prince and people, the reuenge of noble,
And the contempt of base, the incurd vengeance
Of my wrongd kinsman Colatine, the Treason
A Gainst diuin'st Lucrece: all these total cursses
Foreseene not fearde vppon me Sextus meete,
To make my daies harsh so this might be sweete,
No iarre of clocke, no ominous hatefull howle
Of any starting Hound, no horse rough breath'd from the entrals 
Of any drowsie Groom, wakes this charm'd silence, 
and starts this generall silence forward stil, 
To make thy luste liue, all thy vertues kill.
Heere, heere, beholde! beneath these Curtaines lyes,
That bright enchantresse that hath daz'd my eies.
Oh, who but Sextus could commit such waste
On one so faire, so kinde, so truely chaste?
Or like a rauisher thus rudely stand,
To offend this face, this brow, this lip, this hand?
Or at such fatall houres, these reuells keepe,
With thought once to defile thy innocent sleepe,
Saue in this brest, such thoughts could finde no place,
Or pay with treason her kind hospitall grace:
But I am lust-burnt, all bent on what's bad,
That which should calme good thoughts makes Tarquin mad.
Madam, Lucresse?
Whose that? oh me! beshrew you.
Sweete, tis I.
What I?
Make roome.
My Husband Colatine
Thy husband's at the Campe.
Here is no roome for any man saue him.
Graunt me that grace.
What are you?
Tarquin and thy friend, and must enioy thee.
Heauen such sinnes defend.
Why doe you tremble Lady? cease this feare,
I am alone, there's no suspitious ear,
That can bewray this deede: nay start not sweete.
Dreame I, or am I full awake? oh no!
I know I dreame to see Prince Tarquin so.
Sweet Lord awake me, rid me from this terror,
I know you for a Prince, a Gentleman,
Royall and honest, one that loues my Lord,
And would not wrack a womans chastitie,
For Romes imperiall Diademe, oh then
Pardon this dreame, for being awake I know,
Prince Sextus, Romes great hope, would not for shame
Prouoke his owne wrath, or dispoile my fame.
I'me bent on both, my thoughts are all on fire,
Choose thee, thou must imbrace death, or desire,
Yet doe I loue thee, wilt thou accept it?
No.
If not thy loue, thou must inioy thy foe,
where faire meanes cannot, force shall make my way:
By Ioue I must inioy thee.
Sweet Lord stay.
I'me all impatience, violence and rage,
And saue thy bed, nought cā this fire asswage
No, I cannot.
Tell me why?
Hate me, and in that hate first let me dye.
By Joue ile force thee.
By a God you sweare to doe a devils deede: sweete Lord forbear
By the same Ioue I sweare that made this soule,
Neuer to yeelde vnto an act so foule. Helpe, helpe.
These cushens first shall stop thy breath,
If thou but shreekest: harke how ile frame thy death.
The death: I care not, so I keepe vnstained,
The vnceaz'd honour I haue yet maintaind.
Thou canst keepe neither, for if thou but squeakest,
Or lets the least harsh noise Iarre in my eare,
Ile broach thee on my steele: that done, straite murder
One of thy basest Groomes, and lay you both
Graspt arme in arme, on thy adulterate bed.
Then call in witnes of that mechall sin,
So shalt thou die: thy death be scandalous,
Thy name be odious, thy suspected body
Denide all funerall rites, and louing Colatine
Shall hate thee euen in death: then saue all this,
and to thy fortunes adde another friend,
Giue thy feares comfort, and these torments end.
Ile die first, and yet heare me: oh as y'are noble,
If all your gratious and best generous thoughts
Be not exilde your heart, pittie, oh pittie
The Vertues of a woman: marre not that
Cannot be made againe: this once defilde,
Not all the Ocean waues can purifie,
Or wash my staine away, you seeke to foil
That which the radiant splender of the Sunne
Cannot make bright againe: behold my teares!
Oh thinke them pearled drops, destilled from the heart
Of soule chaste Lucrece: thinke them Orators,
To pleade the cause of absent Colatine, your friend and kinsman.
Tush, I am obdure.
Then make my name foul: keepe my body pure:
Oh Prince of Princes, doe but weigh your sinne,
Thinke how much I shall loose, how small you winne.
I loose the honour of my name and blood,
Lost, Romes imperiall Crowne cannot make good.
You win the worlds shame, & all good mens hate,
Oh who would pleasure, buy at such deere rate?
Nor can you terme it pleasure: for what's sweet,
Where force & hate, iarre and contention meete?
Weigh but for what tis that you vrge me still,
To gaine a womans loue against her will?
Youle but repent such wrong done a chaste wife,
and think that labour's not worth all your strife.
Cursse your hot lust, & say you haue wrongd your friends,
But all the world cannot make me amends.
I tooke you for a friend, wrong not my trust,
But let these chast tearmes quench your fiery lust.
No, those moist teares, contending with my fire,
Quench not my heate, but make it climbe more higher:
Ile drag thee hence.
Oh!
If thou raise these cries, lodg'd in thy flaughtered
arms some base Groome dies,
And Rome that hath thy name admired so long,
Shal blot thy death with scandal from my tungue.
Ioue garde my innocence.
Lucrece, thar't mine
In spight of Ioue & all the powers diuine.
What's a clocke tro? my Lord bad me be earely ready with his Gelding, 
for he would ride betimes in the morning: now had I rather be vp 
an houre before my time then a minute after, for my Lord will bee so infinitely eangrie 
if I but ouer sleepe my selfe a moment, that I had better bee out of 
my life then in his displeasure: but foft, some of my Lord Colatines 
men lye in the next chamber, I care not if I call them vp, for it growes towards day: 
what Pompy, Pompy.
Who is that cal's?
Tis I.
Whose that, my Lord Sextus his man? what a poxe make you vp before day?
I would haue the key of the Gate to come at my Lords horse in the stable.
I wold my Lord Sextus & you were both in the hayloft, 
for Pompy can take none of his naturall rest amongst you, heres 
an Ostler, rise & giue my horse another pecke of hay.
Nay good Pompy helpe me to the Key of the stable.
Well, Pompy was borne to doe Rome good, in beeing so kinde to the young Princes Gelding, 
but if for my kindenesse in giuing him Pease and Oates, hee should kick mee, 
I should scarse say god a merrie horse: but come, ile goe with thee to the stable.
Nay, weepe not sweete, what's done is past recall,
Call not thy name in question, by this sorrow
Which yet is without blemish, what hath past
Is hid from the worldes eye, and only priuate
Twixt vs, faire Lucrece, pull not on my head
The wrath of Rome if I haue done thee wrong,
Loue was the cause, thy fame is without blot,
And thou in Sextus hast a true friend got,
Nay sweete looke vp, thou only hast my hart,
I must be gone Lucrece a kisse and part.
Oh!
No? peuish dame farwell, then be the bruter
Of thy owne shame, which Tarquin would conceale
I am armd against all can come, let mischiefe frown,
With all his terror arm'd with ominous fates,
To all their spleenes a welcome Ile affoord,
With this bold hart, strong hand, and my good sword.
What so early Valer. and your voyce not vp yet? 
thou wast wont to be my Lark and raise me with thy early notes.
I was neuer so hard set yet my Lord, but I had euer a fit of mirth for my friend.
Prethee let's heare it then whilst we may, 
for I deuine thy musique and my madnes are both short liu'd, 
we shall haue somewhat else to doe ere long, we hope Valerius.
Ioue send it.
Me thinks our warres goe not wel forward,
Horatius, we haue greater Enimies to bustle with then the
Ardeans if we durst but front them Horatius.
Would it were come to fronting.
Then we married men should haue the aduantage of the batchelers Horatius, 
especially such as haue reuelling wiues, those that can caper in the Citty, 
while their husbands are in the Camp, Collat why are you so sad? 
the thought of this shold not trouble you, hauing a Luc. to your bedfellow.
My Lord I know no cause of discontent, yet can not I be merry.
I should be frolique if my brother were but returnd to the Camp, 
and in good time behould Prince Sextus.
Health to our generall.
Thank you.
Wil you suruey your forces, & giue order for a present assault, 
your soldiers long to be tugging with the Ardeās.
No.
Haue you seene Lucretia my Lord, how fares shee?
Well, Ile to my Tent.
Why how now whats the matter brother?
Thank you, No, well, Ile to my Tent, get thee to thy Tent & a coward goe with thee, 
if thou hast no more spirit to a speedy encounter.
Shall I goe after him and know the cause of his discontent?
Or I my Lord?
Neither, to pursue a foole in his humour? is the next way to make him more humerous, 
Ile not be guiltie of his folly, Thank you! 
no, before I wish him health agen when he is sicke of the sullens, may I dye, 
not like a Roman, bu a runagate.
Perhaps hee's not well.
Well, then let him be ill.
The news with this hasty poast?
Did nobody see my Lord Colatine? oh, my Lady commends her to you, heer's a letter.
Giue it me.
Fye vppon't, neuer was poore Pompy so ouer-labourde as I haue bin, 
I thinke I haue spurd my horse such a question, 
that hee's scarce able to wig or wag his taile for an answere, 
but my Lady bad me spare for no horse flesh, and I think I haue made him run his race.
Cosen Colatine the news at Rome?
Nothing but what you all may well pertak: read here my Lord.
Deere Lord, if euer thou wilt see thy Lucrece,
Choose of the friends which thou affectest best,
And all important busines set apart,
Repaire to Rome: commend me to Lord Brutus,
Valerius Mutius, & Horatius,
Say I intreat their presence, where my Father
Lucretius shall attend them, farwell sweete,
Th' affaires are great, then doe not faile to meete.
Ile thither as I liue,
I though I dye,
To Roome with expeditious wings weel'e fly.
The news, the newes, if it haue any shape
Of sadnes, if some prodegye haue chanst,
That may beget reuenge, Ile cease to chafe,
Vexe, martyr, grieue, torture, torment my selfe,
And tune my humour to strange strains of mirth:
My soule deuines some happinesse, speak, speak:
I know thou hast some newes that will create me
Merry and musical, for I would laugh,
Be new transhapt, I prethee sing Valerius that I may ayre
with thee.
First tell vs what's the proiect of thy massage?
My Lords, the princely Sextus has bene at home, but what he hath done, 
I may partly mistrust, but cannot altogether resolue you: besides, my Lady swore me, 
that whatsoeuer I suspected I should say nothing.
If thou wilt not say thy minde, I prethee sing thy minde, and then thou maist saue thine oath.
Indeede I was not sworn to that, I may either laugh out my newes or sing am, 
and so saue my oath to my Lady.
Howe's all at Rome, that with such sad presage,
Disturbed Colatine, and noble Brutus
Are hurryed from the Campe with Scevola?
And we with expedition amongst the rest,
Are charg'd to Rome? speake, what did Sextus there with thy faire mistresse?
Did he take faire Lucrece by the toe man?
Toe man.
I man.
Ha, ha, ha, ha man.
And further did he strive to goe man?
Goe man.
I man.
Ha, ha, ha man, hafa derry derry derry downe a, hey fa derry dino.
Did he take faire Lucrece by the heele man?
Heele man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
And did he further striue to feele man?
Feele man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, &c.
Did he take the Lady by the shin man?
Shin man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
Further too would he haue been man?
Bin man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man. Hey fadery. &c.
Did he take the Lady by the knee man?
Knee man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
Further then that would he be man.
Bee man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man. hey fa derie, &c.
Did he take the Lady by the thigh man?
Thigh man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
And now he came it somewhat nye man.
Nye man
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, Hey fa dery, &c.
But did he doe the tother thing man?
Thing man?
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
And at the same had he a fling man.
Fling man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, &c.
Mirable.
Madam.
Is not my father old Lucrecius come yet?
Not yet.
Nor any from the Campe?
Neither madam.
Go, be gone, and leaue me to the truest grief of heart
That euer entred any Matrons brest. Oh!
Why weepe you Lady? alas why doe you staine
Your modest cheekes with these offensiue teares?
Nothing, nay nothing: oh you powerfull Gods,
That should haue Angels guardent on your throne,
To protect innocence and chastitie!
oh why Suffer you such inhumane massacre
On harmeles vertue? wherefore take you charge,
On sinles soules to see them wounded thus:
With Rape or Violence? forgiue white innocence,
Armor of proofe gainst sinne: or by oppression
Kill Vertue quite, & guerdon base transgression?
Is it my fate aboue all other women?
Or is my sinne more haynous then the rest,
That amongst thousands, millions, infinites,
I, only I, should to this shame be borne,
To be a staine to women, natures scorne? oh!
What ailes you Madam, troth you make me weepe
To see you shead salt teares: what hath opprest you?
Why is your chamber hung with mourning blacke?
Your habit sable, and your eyes thus swolne
With ominous teares: alas what troubles you?
I am not, thou didst deceiue thy felfe,
I did not weepe, theres nothing troubles me,
But wherefore dost thou blush?
Madam not I.
Indeede thou didst, and in that blush my guilt thou didst betray
How cam'st thou by the notice of my sinne?
What sinne?
My blot, my scandall and my shame:
Oh Tarquin! thou my honour didst betray,
Disgrace no time, no age can wipe away, oh!
Sweete Lady cheere your selfe, ile fetch my Vyol
And see if I can sing you fast a sleepe,
A little rest would weare away this passion.
Doe what thou wilt, I can commaund no more,
Being no more a woman, I am now
Deuote to death, and an inhabitant
Of th'other world: these eyes must euer weepe,
Till fate hath closde them with eternall sleepe.
Brutus!
Lucretius!
Father!
Lucrece!
Collatine!
How cheare you Madam? how ist with you cousen?
Why is your eye deiect and drown'd in sorrow?
Why is this funerall black, and ornaments
Of widdow-hood? resolue me cousen Lucrece.
How fare you Lady?
What's the matter girle?
Why how i'st with you Lucrece, tell me sweete?
Why doost thou hide thy face? & with thy hand
Darken those eies that were my Sunnes of joy,
To make my pleasures florish in the Spring?
Oh me!
Whence are these sighes and teares?
How growes this passion?
Speake Lady you are hem'd in with your friendes,
Girt in a pale of safety, and environ'd
and cirkled in a fortresse of your kinred,
Let not those drops fall fruiteles to the ground,
Nor let your sighes ad to the sencelesse winde.
Speake, who hath wrong you?
Ere I speake my woe,
Sweare youle reuenge poore Lucrece on her foe.
Be his head archt with golde.
Be his hand arm'd with an imperiall Scepter.
Be he great as Tarquin throand in an imperial seat
Be he no more then mortall, he shall feele
The vengefull edge of this victorious steele.
Then seate you Lords, whilst I expose my wrong.
Father, deere husband, and my kinsmen, Lords
Heare me, I am dishonour'd and disgrac'd,
My reputation mangled, my renown
disparaged, but my body, oh my body
What Lucrece?
Staind, polluted and defilde.
Strange steps are found in my adulterate bed,
And though my thoughts be white as innocence,
Yet is my body soild with lust burnd sinne,
And by a stranger I am strumpited,
Rauisht, inforc'd, and am no more to ranke among the Roman Matrons.
Yet cheere you Lady, and restraine these teares,
If you were forc'd, the sinne concernes not you,
A woman's born but with a womans strength: who was the Rauisher?
I, name him Lady, our loue to you shal only thus appeare
In the reuenge that we will take on him.
I hope so Lords, t'was Sextus the Kings Sonne.
How? Sextus Tarquin!
That vnprincely Prince, who guest-wise entred with my husbands Ring,
This Ring, oh Collatine! this Ring you sent
Is cause of all my woe, your discontent.
I feasted him, then lodgd him, and bestowde
The choisest welcome, but in dead of night,
My Traiterous guest came arm'd vnto my bed,
Frighted my silent sleepe, threatend, and praide
For entertainment: I despised both.
Which hearing his sharpe pointed Semitar,
The Tyrant bent against my naked brest,
Alas, I begd my death, but note his tyranny,
He brought with him a torment worse then death
For hauing murdred me, he swore to kill,
One of my basest Groomes and lodge him dead
In my dead armes: then call in testimony
Of my adulterie, to make me hated
Euen in my death, of husband, father, friendes,
Of Rome and all the world: this, this, oh Princes, Rauisht and kild me at once.
Yet comfort Lady, I quit thy guilt, for what could
Lucrece doe more then a woman? hadst thou dide polluted
By this base scandall, thou hadst wrong'd thy fame,
And hinderd vs of a moste iust reuenge.
What shall we doe Lords?
Lay your resolute handes vpon the sword of Brutus,
Vow & sweare, as you hope meed for merrit from the Gods
Or feare reward for sinne, from deuils below:
As you are Romans, and esteeme your fame
More then your liues, all humorous toyes set off,
Of madding, singing, smilings, and what else,
Receiue your natiue vallours, be your selues,
And ioyne with Brutus in the iust reuenge
Of this chaste rauisht Lady, sweare
We doe.
Then with your humors heere my griefe ends too,
My staine I thus wipe off, call in my sighes,
and in the hope of this reuenge, forbeare
Euen to my death to fall one passionate teare.
Yet Lords, that you may crowne my innocence,
With your best thoughts, that you may henceforth know,
We are the same in heart we seeme in show.
and though I quit my soule of all such sin, 
Ile not debarre my body punishment:
Let all the world, learne of a Roman dame,
To prise her life lesse then her honord fame.
Lucrece?
Wife.
Lady.
She hath slaine herselfe.
Oh see yet Lords if there be hope of life
Shees dead, then turne your funerall teares to fire and indignation, 
let vs now redeeme Our misspent time, and ouer take our sloath With hostile expedition, 
this great Lords, This bloody knife, on which her chast blood flower, 
Shall not from Brutus till some strange reuenge fall on the heads of Tarquins.
Nowe's the time to call their pride to compt,
Brutus leade on, Weele follow thee to their confusion.
By Jove we will, the sprightfull youth of Rome,
Trickt vp in plumed harnesse, shall attend
The march of Brutus, whome wee here create our genrall against the Tarquins.
Bee it so.
We imbrace it: now to stir the wrath of Rome,
You, Collatine and good Lucretius,
With eyes yet drown'd in teares, beare that chaste body
Into the market place: that horrid obiect,
Shall kindle them with a most iust reuenge.
To see the father and the husband mourne
Ore this chaste dame, that haue so well deseru'd
Of Rome and them, then to infer the pride,
The wrongs and the perpetuall tyranny
Of all the Tarquins, Servius Tullius death,
and his vnnaturall vsage by that Monster
Tullia the Queene, all these shall well concurre in a combind reuenge
Lucrece, thy death weele mourne in glittering armes
and plumed caskes: some beare that reuerend loade,
Vnto the forum where our force shall meete
To set vppon the pallas, and expell
This viperous broode from Rome: I know the people
Will gladly imbrace our fortunes: Sceuola,
Goe you and muster powers in Brutus name.
Valerius, you assist him instantly,
and to the mazed people freely speake the cause of this concourse
We goe.
And you deare Lord, whose speechles greef is boundles,
Turne all your teares with ours, to wrath and rage,
The hearts of all the Tarquins shall weep blood
Vpon the funerall Hearse, with whose chaste body,
Honor your armes, and to th'assembled people,
Disclose her innocent woundes: Gramercies Lords,
That vniuersall shout tels me their words
are gratious with the people, and their troopes
are ready imbatteled and expect but vs,
To leade their troopes, Ioue giue our fortunes speede,
Weele murder, murder, and base rape shall bleede.
Euen thus farre Tirant haue we dogd thy stepes,
Frighting thy frighted feare with horrid steele.
Lodge in the safety of Porsennaes armes
Now Traytor Brutas we dare front thy pride.
Porsenna thou art vnworthy of a scepter,
To shelter pride, lust, rape, and tiranny,
In that proud Prince and his confederate sonnes.
Traytors to heauen, to Tarquin, Roome and vs,
Treason to Kings, doth stretch euen to the Gods,
And those high Gods that take great Rome in charge,
shall punish your rebellion.
Oh Deuil! Sextus speake not thou of Gods,
Not cast those false and fained eyes to heauen,
Whose rape the furies must torment in Hell, of Lucr: Lucrect:
Her chast blood still cries for vengeance to the Etheriall deities
Oh twa's a foule deede Sextus,
And thy shame shal be eternall, and outlive her fame
Say Sextus lou'd her, was she not a woman,
I, and perhaps was willing to beforc'd,
Must you being priuate subiects dare to ring
Warres loud alarum gainst your potent King?
Brutus therein thou dost forget thy selfe, And wrongst the glory of thine 
Ancestors, stayning thy bloud with Treason.
Tuscan know the Consull Brutus is their powerfull foe.
Consull
I consull, and the powerfull hand of Rome
Graspes his imperiall sword: the name of King
The tirant Tarquins haue made odious
Vnto this nation: and the generall knee,
Of this our warlik people, now lowe bends
To royall Brutus where the kings name endes.
Now Sextus, where's the Oracle, when I kissed
My Mother earth it plainely did foretell,
My noble vertues should thy sin exceed,
Brutus should sway, & lust-burnt Tarquin bleed
Now shall the blood of Seruius fall, as heauy as a huge mountaine 
on your Tyrant heads, orewhelming all your glory.
Tullias guilt shall be by vs reuengd, that in her pride,
In blood paternal, her rough coach-wheeles dide.
Your Tirannies,
Pride.
And my Lucrece fate, shall al be swalowd in this hostile hate.
Oh Romulus, thou that fiirst reard yon walles,
In sight of which we stand, in thy soft bosome
Is hangd the nest in which the Tarquins build,
Which in the branches of thy lofty spires,
Tarquin shal pearch, or where he once hath stood,
His high built airy shall be drownd in blood,
alarum then, Brutus by heauen I vow,
My sword shall prooue thou nere wast mad till now.
Sextus, my madnes with your liues expires,
Thy sensuall eyes are fixt vpon that wall,
Thou nere shalt enter, Rome confines you all.
A charge then.
Ioue and Tarquin.
but we cry a Brutus.
Lucrece, force and victory.
Thou Iouiall hand hould vp thy scepter high
And let not iustice be oprest with pride,
Oh you Senators, leaue not Roome and vs,
Graspt in the purple hands of death and ruine, the Tarquins haue the best.
Yet stand, my foote is fixt vpon this bridge.
Tyber, thy arched streames shall be changd crimso, with
Roman bloud, before I trudge form hence.
Brutus retire, for if thou enter Rome,
We are all lost, stand not on valor now,
But saue thy people, lets suruiue this day
To try the fortunes of another field.
Breake downe the bridge, lest the pursuing enemy Enter with vs and take the spoile of Rome.
Then breake behind me, for by heauen Ile grow,
And roote my foote as deepe as to the center, before I leaue this passage.
Come you'r mad.
The foe comes on and we in trifling here hazard our selfe and people.
Saue them all, to make Rome stand, Horatius here will fall.
We would not lose thee, do not brest thy selfe
Mongst thousands, if thou frontst them thou art ringde,
With million swords and darts, and we behind
Must breake the bridge of Tiber to saue Rome,
Before thee infinits gase on thy face,
And menace death, the raging streames of Tiber are at thy backe to swallow thee.
Retire to make Rome liue, tis death that I desire.
Then farewell dead Horatius, thinke in vs
The vniuersall arme of potent Rome,
Takes his last leaue of thee in this embrace.
Farwell.
Farwell.
These arches all must downe to interdict their passage the towne.
Enter, enter, enter.
Soft Tarquin, see a bulwarke to this bridge.
You first must passe, the man that enters here
Must make his passage through Horatius brest,
See with this target do I buckle Rome,
And with this sword defy the puissant army of two great king.
One man to face an host,
Charge souldiers, of full forty thousan Romans,
Theres but one daring hand against your host,
To keep you from the sacke or spoile of Rome, charge, charge.
Vpon them Souldiers!
Oh cowards, slaues, and vassals what not enter?
Was it for this you plac'd my regiment
Vpon a hill, to be the sad spectator
Of such a generall cowardise? Tarquin, Aruns,
Porsenna, souldiers, passe Horatius quickly,
And they behind him will deuolue the bridge
And raging Tyber that's impassible,
Your host must swim before you conquer Rome.
Yet stand Horatius, beare but one brunt more,
The arched bridge shall sinke vpon his piles
And in his fall lift vp thy renown to heauen
Yet enter.
Deare Horatius, yet stand, & saue a milliō by one powerful hand
Charge charge, charge.
Degenerate slaues, the bridge is falne, Romes lost.
Horatius thou art stronger then their Hostes,
Thy strength is vertue, theirs are idle boastes.
Now saue thy selfe and leap into the waues.
Porsenna, Tarquin, now wade past your depths,
And enter Rome, I feele my body sinke
Beneath my pondrous waight, Rome is preseru'd,
And now farewell: for he that followes me
Must search the bottome of this raging stream,
Fame with thy golden wings, renowne my crest,
And Tiber take me on thy siluer brest.
Hee's leapt off from the bridge and drownd himselfe.
You are deceiu'd, his spirits soares too hie
To be choakt in with the base element
Of water, lo he swims armd as he was,
Whilest all the army haue dischargd their arrowes.
Of which the shield vpon his backe sticke ful.
And harke the sute of all the multitude.
Now welcomes him a land, Horatius fame
Hath chekt our armies with a generall shame;
But come, to morrowes fortune must restore,
This scandall, which I of the Gods implore
Then we must find another time faire prince,
To scourge these people, and reuenge your wrongs.
For this night ile betake me to my tent
And we to ours, to morrowe we will renowne
Our army with the spoile of a Rich-towne.
Our secretary.
My Lord.
Command lights and torches in our tents.
And let a Guard ingirt our safety rownd,
Whilest we debate of military busines: come sit and lets consult.
Horatius, famous for defending Rome.
But we ha done nought worthy, Scevola,
Nor of a Roman, I in this disguise
Haue past the army & the puissant guard
Of king Porsenna; this should be his tent
And in good time, now fate direct my strength
Against a king to free great Rome at length.
Oh I am slaine, treason, treason.
Villaine what hast thou done?
Why slaine the king.
What king?
Porsenna.
Porsenna liues to see thee tortured,
With plagues more diuillish then the plague of hel.
Oh too rash Mutius, hast thou mist thy aime?
And thou base hand that didst direct my poniard
Against a peasants brest, behold thy errour,
Thus I will punish, I will giue thee freely
Vnto the fire, nor will I weare a limbe,
That with such rashness shall offend his Lord.
What wil the madman doe?
Porsenna so punish my hand thus, for not killing thee.
Three hundred noble lads beside my selfe
Haue vow'd to all the Gods that patron Rome,
Thy ruine for supporting tyrannie;
And though I faile, expect yet euerie houre,
When some strange fate thy fortunes wil deuoure.
Stay Roman, we admire thy constancie,
And scorne of fortune, go returne to Rome,
We giue thee life, and say the King Porsenna,
Whose life thou seekst is this honourable,
Passe freely, gard him to the walles of Rome,
And were we not so much ingadge to Tarquin,
We would not lift a hand against that nation that breedes such noble spirits.
Well I go, and for reuenge take life euen of my foe.
Conduct him safely, what 300 Gallants
Sworne to our death, and all resolu'd like him!
We must be prouident, to morrowes fortune
Weele proue for Tarquin, if they faile our hopes,
Peace shal be made with Rome, but first our secretary,
Shall haue his due rights of funerall, then our shield
We must addresse next for to morrowes field.
By thee we are consul, & stil gouerne Rome,
Which but for thee, had bin dispoild and tane,
Made a confused heape of men and stones,
Swimming in bloud and slaughter, dere Horatius
Thy noble picture shal be caru'd in brasse,
And fixt for thy perpetuall memory in our high capitoll.
Great consul thankes, but leauing this, lets march out of the citie.
And once more bid them battell on the plaines.
This day my soule diuines we shal liue free
From all the furious Tarquins: but wheres Scevola? we se not him to day.
Here Lords behold me handlesse as you see,
The cause I mist Porsonna in his tent,
And in his stead kild but his secretary.
The mazed King when he beheld me punish
My rash mistake, with losse of my right hand
Vnbegd and almost scornd he gaue me life,
Which I had then refus'd, but in desire to venge faire Lucrece Rape.
Deare Scevola thou hast exceeded vs in our resolue,
But wil the Tarquins giue vs present battell?
That may ye heare, the skirmish is begun already twixt the horse.
Then noble consull leade our main battell on.
Oh Ioue this day ballance our cause, and let the innocēt bloud
Of Rape staind Lucrece crowne with death and horror
The heads of all the Tarquins, see this day
In her cause do we consecrate our liues,
And in defence of Iustice now march on:
I heare their martiall musique, be our shock
As terrible as are the meeting clowdes
That breake in thunder, yet our hopes are faire,
And this rough charge shal all our hopes repaire.
Yet grow our lofty plumes vnflagd with bloud,
And yet sweet pleasure wantons in the aire, how goes the battell Aruns?
Tis euen ballanct, I enterchang'd with Brutus hand to hand, 
a dangerous encounter both are wounded, & had not the rude prease diuided vs, 
one had dropt downe to earth.
Twas brauely fought, I saw the King your father free his person from thousand 
Romans that begirt his state, where flying arrowes thick as atoms hung about his eares.
I hope a glorious day, come Tuskan king, lets on them.
Aruns stay, that sword that late did drinke the consuls bloud
Must with his keene phange tire vpon my flesh, or this on thine.
It sparde the consuls life to end thy daies in a more glorious strife.
I stand against thee Tuscan.
I for thee.
Where ere I find a Tarquin, hees for me.
Faire Tullia leaue me, saue thy life by flight,
Since mine is desperate, behold I am wounded
Euen to the death, there staies within my tent
A winged Iennet, mount his back and fly,
Liue to reuenge my death since I must dy.
Had I the heart to treade vpon the bulke
Of my dead father, and to see him slaughtered,
Only for loue of Tarquin and a crowne,
And shall I feare death more then losse of both?
No, this is Tulliaes fame, rather then fly
From Tarquin, mongst a thousand swords sheel dy.
Hew them to peeces both.
My Tullia saue, and ore my caitiue head those meteors waue.
Let Tullia yeeld then.
Yeeld me cuckold no mercy, I scorne, let me the danger know.
Vpon them then.
Lets bring them to their fate,
And let them perish in the peoples hate.
Feare not, Ile back thee husband.
But for thee, sweet were the hand that this chargd soule could free.
Life I diepise, let noble Sextus stand
To auenge our death, euen til these vitals end,
Scorning my owne, this life will I defend.
And Ile sweete Tarquin to my power gard thine,
Come on you slaues and make this earth diuine.
Aruns this crimson fauor for thy sake,
Ile weare vpon my forehead maskt with bloud
Till all the moistures in the Tarquins veines
Be spilt vpon the earth and leaue thy body
As dry as the parcht sommer, burnt and scorcht with the canicular starres.
Aruns lies dead by this bright sword thats here about his head.
And see great consull, where the pride of Rome lies sunke and fallen.
Besides him lies the queene mangled and hewd amongst the Roman soldièrs.
Lift vp their slaughtered bodies, help to reare them against this hill in view of all the camp, 
This sight wil be a terror to the foe, and make them yield or fly.
But wheres the rauisher, iniurious Sextus that we see not him?
Through broken speares, crackt swords, vnboweld steedes
Flaude armors, mangled limbes, and battered caskes,
Knee deepe in bloud, I ha pierct the Roman host to be my fathers rescue.
Tis too late, his mounting prid's sunke in the peoples hate.
My father, mother, brother, fortune now,
I do defy thee, I expose my selfe,
To horrid danger, saftie I despise,
I dare the worst of perill, I am bound,
On till this pile of flesh be all one wound,
Begirt him Lord, this is the Rauisher.
Theres no reuenge for Lucrece til he fall.
Cease Sextus then.
Sextus defies you all, yet wil you giue me language ere I die:
Say on.
Tis not for mercy, for I scorne that life
Thats giuen by any, and the more to ad
To your immense vnmeasurable hate,
I was the spur vnto my fathers pride,
Twas I that awde the Princes of the Land,
That made thee Brutus mad, these discontents,
I rauisht the chaste Lucrece, Sextus I,
The daughter and thy wife, Brutus thy cosen.
Allide indeed to all, twas for my Rape,
Her constant hand ript vp her innocent brest, twas Sextus did all this.
Which ile reuenge.
Leaue that to me.
Old as I am ile do't.
I haue one hand yet left, of strength inough to kill a rauisher.
Come all at once, I all: yet heare me Brutus, thou art Honorable.
And my words tend to thee: my father dide
By many hands, whats he mongst you can challenge
The least, I smallest honor in his death?
If I be kild amongst this hostile throng
The poorest snakie souldier well may claime
As much renowne in royall Sextus death,
As Brutus, thou, or thou Horatius.
I am to die, and more then die I cannot,
Rob not your selues of Honor in my death.
When the two mightiest spirits of Greece and Troy
Tugde for the masterie, Hector and Achilles,
Had puissant Hector by Achilles hand,
Dide in a single monomachie Achilles,
Had been the worthie, but being slaine by odds,
The poorest Mirmidon had as much honor
As saint Achilles in the Troians death.
Hadst thou not done a deed so execrable,
That Gods and men abhorre, ide loue thee Sextus,
And hugge thee for this chalēge breath'd so freely:
Behold, I stand for Rome as Generall,
Thou of the Tarquins dost alone suruiue,
The head of all these garboyles the chife actor
Of that blacke sinne which we chastise by armes.
Brave Romans, with your bright swords be our lists
And ring vs in, none dare to offend the Prince
By the least touch, lest he incurre our wrath:
This honor do your Consull, that his hand
may punish this arch mischiefe, that the times
Succeeding may of Brutus thus much tell,
By him pride, lust, and all the Tarquins fell.
To rauish Lucrece, cuckold Collatine:
And spill the chasest bloud that euer ran,
In any matrons vaines, repents me not
So much as to ha wrong'd a gentleman
So noble as the Consul in this strife.
Brutus be bold, thou fightst with one scornes life.
And thou with one that lesse then his renowne,
Priseth his bloud, or Romes imperiall crowne
Sextus stand faire, much honour shall I winn
To reuenge Lucrece, and chastise thy sin.
I repent nothing, may I liue or die,
Though my bloud fall, my spirit shall mount on hie.
Both slaine: oh noble Brutus this thy fame
To after ages shall suruiue, thy body
Shall haue a faire & gorgious Sepulchre:
For whom the matrons shall in funeral black
Mourne twelue sad moones, thou that first gouern'd Rome,
And swaid the people by a consuls name.
These bodies of the Tarquins weele commit
Vnto the funerall pile: you Collatine
Shall succeed Brutus, in the consuls place.
Whom with this Lawrel wreath we here relate.
Such is the peoples voice, accept it then.
We do, and may our power so iust appeare
Rome may haue peace, both with our loue & feare.
But soft, what march is this?
The Tuscan king, seeing the Tarquins slaine.
Thus arm'd and battelled offers peace to Rome.
To confirme which, we'le giue you present hostage
If you deny, we'le stand vpon our guard,
And by the force of armes, maintaine our owne
After so much effusion and large wast
Of Roman bloud the name of peace is welcome,
Since of the Tarquins none remaine in Rome.
And Lucrece's rape is now reueng'd at full.
Twere good to entertaine Porsenna's league.
Porsenna we embrace, whose royall presence
Shall grace the Consull to the funerall pile.
March on to Rome, Ioue be our guard and guide,
That hath in vs veng'd Rape and punisht pride.