After the waste of many thousand wounds
Given and received alike, in seven set battles,
Lydia’s old King (upon conditions signed
For peace and truce), entered constrainèd league
With his fierce enemy the Lycian King,
Gave him in hostage as his pledge of faith
His nephew, Lord Lapyrus, and received
Noble Zantippus from the Lycian,
To make the contract full and honourable.
This Lord Lapyrus entertained and welcomed By [ ],
But chiefly by the fair Eurymone,
The King’s sole daughter, who unto Lapyrus
Offers her as his bride, so he would turn
A traitor to his country and his king.
Lapyrus, to obtain the beauteous maid,
Turns traitor to his king, and joins his force
Unto his fair love’s father’s, Lycia’s king’s;
Th’old King of Lydia, being so beset
By his own nephew’s unexpected treacheries,
Sent forth his son Tymethes to crave aid
From Armatrites, King of great Cilicia,
Which he obtained—in a disastrous hour,
As the event will witness. In this trouble
The frighted Queen with her two infants fled
Into a forest, fearing the sad ruin
Hourly expected, until Armatrites
With a fresh army forced Lapyrus fly
And saved the King, doomed for worse treachery.
What follows shows itself; ’tis our full due,
If we with labour give content to you. 
Speranza
Long live Armatrites, King of Lydia!
How?
Art thou amazed, old King, and all thy people
Mutually labouring in a fit of wonder?
Start from those pale dreams: we will prove all true.
Who wins the day, the brightness is his due.
King of Cilicia—
Ay, and Lydia now.
Bate us not our titles: we and ours
Have sweat and dearly earned them in our flesh.
It savours not of nobleness nor virtue,
Religion, loyalty, heaven or nature’s laws
So most perfidiously to enter, tyrant,
Where was expected honesty and honour,
Assistance from a friend, not a dissembler,
A royal neighbour and no politic foe.
What worse than this could th’enemy perform?
And when shines friendship best but in a storm?
Why, doting Lydia, is it of no virtue
To bring our army hither, and put in venture
Our person and their lives upon your foes?
Wasting our courage, weak’ning our best forces,
Impoverishing the heart of our munition,
And having won the honour of the battle
To throw our glory on unworthy spirits,
And so unload victory’s honey thighs
To let drones feed?
Will nothing satisfy but all?
Without all, nothing.
The kingdom, and not under, suits our blood.
Flies are not eagles’ preys, nor thanks our food.
And for Cilicia, our other sphere—
Our son Zenarchus, let thy beams move there.
Rather, my lord, let me move pity here
Unto that reverend fate-afflicted king—
For whom, with his disconsolate son (my friend
And plighted brother) I here kneel as suitor.
O my most noble father, still retain
The seal of honour and religïon.
A kingdom rightfully possessed by course
Contains more joy than is usurped by force.
The boy hath almost changed us.
He cools.—My lord, remember: you are possessed.
What, with the devil?
The devil! The dukedom, the kingdom, Lydia.
All pant under your sceptre; the sway’s yours.
Be not bought out with words. A kingdom’s dear.
Kiss fortune, keep your mind, and keep your state.
You’re laughed at if you prove compassionate.
Thanks to Mazeres; he hath refreshed our spirits.—
Zenarchus, ’tis thy death if thou proceed.
Thy words we threat; rise silent, or else bleed.
Who can expect but blood where tyrants govern?
We are not yet so cruel to thy fortune
As was Lapyrus, thy own nephew, treacherous—
That stole upon thy life, beseiged thee basely,
And had betrayed thee to thine enemies’ anger
Had we not beat his strength to his own throat
And made him shrink before us. All can tell
In him ’twas monstrous; ’tis in us but . . . well,
A trick of war, advantage, policy—
Nay, rather recompense.
There’s more deceit in peace: ’tis common there
T’unfold young heirs; the old may well stand bare.
You have your life, be thankful—and ’tis more
Than your perfidious nephew would consent to,
Had he surprised you first. Your fate is cast.
The sooner you be gone, ’twill prove the safer.
On thee, Lapyrus, and thy treacheries, fall
The heavy burden of an old man’s curse.
Your Queen with her two infants fled the city,
Affrighted at this treason and new wars.
News of more sadness than the kingdom’s loss!
She fled upon her hour, for had she stayed
She’d either died, been banished or betrayed.—
I have some servants here.
All these, my lord.
All these? Not all. You did forget:
I am not worth the flattering. I am done,
Old and at set; honour the rising sun.
If any for love serve me, which is he?
Now let him shame the world and follow me.
That’s I, my lord.
And I.
What, two of you?—
Let it be enrolled
Two follow a king when he is poor and old.
Farewell, king.
I’ll play the flounder: keep me to my tide.
And so will I: this is the flowing side.
Those men are yours, my lord.
We’ll grace them chiefly.—
Wait for employment, place and eminence; 
The like to each that to our bounty flies,
For he that falls to us shall surely rise.—
His son Tymethes little frights our thoughts:
He’s young, and given to pleasure, not to plots.
Your grace defines him right. He may remain; 
The Prince, your son, binds him in a love-chain.
There’s little fear of him.
Their loves are dear.
Base boy, he leaves his father to live here.
His presence sets a gloss on your attempts;
They have their lustre from him.
He’s their countenance.
’Twas well observed and followed; he shall stay.
Mazeres, thou armest us that won the day.
None but Mazeres, that court fly, could on
The virtues of the King blow such corruption.
Man falls to vice in minutes, runs and leaps,
But unto goodness he takes wary steps.
How soon a tyrant—
Why, Tymethes! friend, brother!
Peace, prithee, peace. You undo me if you wake me;
I hope I’m in a dream.
Would ’twere so happy!
No? Why then, wake, beggar!
But the comfort is
I have brave seeming-kinsmen. Why, Zenarchus,
’Tis not the loss of kingdom, father’s banishment,
Uncertainty of mother, afflicts me
With half the violence that those crossed affections
Betwixt your princely sister and ourself,
Who, upon fortune or her father’s frown
Erecting the whole fabric of her love,
Either now will not, or else dare not, love me.
Chance alters not affection: see in me
That hold thee dear still spite of tyranny.
Fate does but dim the gloss of a right man;
He still retains his worth, do what fate can.
Change faith for dross? I will not call her sister,
That shall hate virtue for afflictïon.
And here she comes to clear those doubts herself.
Strange alteration! Will the King my father
Go to his grave a ruffian and a treacher?
In his grey hairs turn tyrant to his friends?
Wasting his penitential times in plots,
Acting more sins than he hath tears to weep them?
Alas, lady, fortune hath changed my state.
Can you love a beggar?
Why, fortune hath the least command o’er love.
She cannot drive Tymethes from himself,
And ’tis Tymethes, not his painted glories,
My soul in her accomplished wish desires.
What say you now, sir?
Nothing but admire
That heaven can frame a creature like a woman
And she be constant, seeing most are common.
Put by your wonder, sir; she proves the same.
I spoke her virtues for her ere she came,
And when my father dies I here do vow,
This kingdom now detainèd wrongfully
Shall then return unforcèdly to you,
In part thy dowry, but in all thy due.
Unmatchèd honest young man!
Come, let your lips meet, though your fortunes wander.
Ha! Taste lips so bounteously with a beggar?
Thus in firm state let your affections rest.
Time, that makes wretched, makes the same men blest.
What’s here? Either the princes (out of charity’s rareness)
Are pleased to lay aside their glories, and 
refresh The gasping fortunes of a desperate wretch;
Or if for larger bounties [...]; I was mad
T’advise the King for his remaining here
That had been banished, and with him my fear.
I love the princess, and the King allows it.
If he should prove a rival to my love,
I have argued fair for his abiding here.
My plots shall work his ruin; if one fail
I’ll raise a second, for I must prevail.
I that used policy to cause him stay
Can show like art to rid my fears away. 
O whither shall I fly with these poor babes?
Twice set upon by thieves within this forest,
Who robbed me of my clothes, and left me these,
Which better suit with my calamity.
What fate pursues the good old King my husband,
I cannot learn, which is my worst affliction.
O treacherous Lapyrus! Impious nephew!
All horrors of a guilty breast keep with thee!—
Either, poor babes, you must pine here for food,
Or have the wars drink your immaculate blood.
O fly, lest life and honour be betrayed. 
Villain and fugitive, where wilt thou hide
Th’abhorrèd burden of thy wretched flesh?
In what disguise canst thou be safe and free,
Having betrayed thy country? Base Lapyrus!
Earth, stretch thy throat: take down this bitter pill,
Loathing the hateful taste of his own ill.
O help! Good heaven, save a poor wretch from slaughter!
Stop her mouth first. Soldiers must have their sport.
’Tis dearly earned; they venture their blood for’t.
A mother so enforced by pitiless slaves?
Let me redeem my honour in her rescue,
And in this deed my former baseness die.
Come, come.
If ever woman bore you—
Whoe’er bore them,
Monsters begot them. Merciless damned villains!
Hold, hold, sir; we are soldiers, but do not love to fight.
Let me dissuade you from all hope of recompense
Save thanks and prayers, which are the beggar’s gifts.
You cannot give me that I have more need of
Than prayers, for my soul hath a poor stock.
There’s a fair house within, but ’tis ill furnished:
There wants true tears for hangings, penitent falls—
For without prayers, soldiers are but bare walls.
Whence are you? that with such a careful charge
Dare pass this dangerous forest?
Generous sir,
I was of Lydia once, as happy then
As now unfortunate, till one Lapyrus,
That traiterous villain, nephew to the King,
Sought the confusion of his state and him,
And with a secret army girt his land
When peace was plighted by his enemy’s hand,
Little expecting such unnatural treason
From forth a kinsman’s bosom; all admired
But I his miserable queen.
O sink into perdition! Let me hear no further.
I’ll tell you all—for your so late attempt
Confirms you honest, and my thoughts so keep you.
I, frighted at new wars and his false breath,
Chose rather with these babes this lingering death.
O, in her words I endure a thousand deaths!
The truth of this sad story hath been yours;
Now, courteous sir, may I request your name?
That in my prayers I may place the same.
I’ll put my death into her woeful hands.
I hear you not, sir. I desire your name.
To add some small content to your distress,
Know that Lapyrus, whom your miseries
May rightly curse and be revengèd justly,
Lurks in this forest equally distressed.
Lurks in this forest that abhorrèd villain?
These eyes did see him—and faith, lady, say
If you should meet that worst of villains here,
That treacher, monster, what would you attempt?
His speedy death. I should forget all mercy,
Had I but means fully to express my vengeance.
You would not, Queen.
No? By these infants’ tears
That weep for hunger, I would throughly do’t.
See, yonder he comes.
O where?
Here, take my sword.
Are you yet constant? Shame your sex, and be so.
Will you do’t?
I see him not.
Strike him through his guilt and treachery
And let him see the horrors of his perjured soul.
Are you ready?
Pray let me see him first.
You see him now—now do’t!
Lapyrus!
O fortunate revenge! Now all thy villanies
Shall be at once requited: thy country’s ruin,
The King thy uncle’s sorrow, my own miseries,
Shall at this minute all one vengeance meet.—
Alas, he doth submit, prays, and relents.
Who could wish more? None made from woman can.
Small glory ’twere to kill a kneeling man.
When he in penitent sighs his soul commends
Thou send’st him to the gods, thyself to th’ fiends.—
But hearken to thy piteous infants’ cries,
And they’re for vengeance. Peace then: now he dies.
—Ungrateful woman, he delivered thee
From ravishment; canst thou his murd’ress be?
What’s riches to thy honour? That rare treasure
Which worlds redeem not, yet ’tis lost at pleasure.
Kill him that preserved that? and in thy rescue
His noble rage so manfully behaved?—
Rise, rise! He that repents is ever saved.
Will misery yet a longer life afford,
To see a queen so poor, not worth her word?
I am better than my word; my word was death.
Man’s ne’er past grief, till he be past his breath.
I pardon all, Lapyrus.
Do not do’t.
And only to one penance I enjoin thee
For all thy faults past: while we here remain
Within this forest, this thy task shall be—
To procure succour to my babes and me.
And if I fail, may the earth swallow me.
Thou’rt now grown good. Here could I ever dwell,
Were the old King, my husband, safe and well.
Come, come, drive away these fits. Faith, I’ll have
thee merry.
As your son and heir at his father’s funeral.
Thou seest my sister constantly affects thee.
There were no mirth nor music else for me.
Sir, in this castle the old King my father,
O’erworn with jealousy, keeps his beauteous wife;
I think thou never saw’st her.
No, not I.
Why then, thy judgement’s fresh. I’ll visit her
O’ purpose for thy censure.
I speak my affection.
Nay on my knowledge she’s worth jealousy,
Though jealousy be far unworth a king.
My loved lord?
How cheers the Queen?
Have I not seen this fellow before now?
He has an excellent presence for a pander;
I know not his office.
Use those words to her.
They shall be used, my lord—and any thing
That comes to using, let it come to me. Exit
What’s he, Zenarchus?
Who, Roxano? A fellow in great trust,
Elected by my father’s jealousy.
But he and all the rest attend upon her
I think would turn her panders for reward—
For ’tis not watch nor ward keeps woman chaste,
If honour’s watch in her mind be not placed.
Right oracle! What gain hath jealousy?
Fruitless suspicion, sighs, ridiculous groans.
Hunger and lust will break through flesh and stones,
And like a whirlwind blows ope castle doors,
Italian padlocks, [ ].
What mad lords are your jealous people then,
That lock their wives from all men but their men?
Make ’em their keepers, to prevent some greater.
So oft it happens to the poor’s relief:
Keepers eat venison, when their lords eat beef.
See, see, she comes.
Honour of beauty! There man’s wishes rise.
Grace and perfection lighten from her eyes;
Amazement is shot through me.
’Tis Tymethes, lady,
Son to the banished King.
Is this he?
It is, sweet lady.
I never knew the force of a desire
Until this minute struck within my blood.
I fear one look was destined to undo me.
Why, Tymethes! Friend?
Ha?
A courtier,
And forget your first weapon? Go and salute
Our lady mother.
He makes towards us.—
You’re Prince Tymethes? So I understand.
The same unfortunate, most gracious lady,
Supremest of your sex in all perfections.
Sir, you’re forgetful. This is no place for courtship,
Nor we a subject for’t. Return to your friend.
All hopes killed in their blossom.
Too cruelly, in faith, I put him by.—
Wine for our son Zenarchus! ’Twas done kindly.
You, son, and our best visitant—
Duty binds me.
Begin to me, Zenarchus; I’ll have’t so.
Why then there’s hope she’ll take occasïon
To drink to me; she hath no means t’avoid it.
I’ll prevent all loose thoughts, drink to myself.
My mind walks yonder, but suspèct walks here.
The devil’s on that side and engrosses all,
Smiles, favours, common courtesies—none can fall
But he has a snatch at ’em. Not drink to me?
Make you yon stranger drink.
Pox on’t, not I.
I speak strange words against my fantasy.
Prithee, Tymethes, drink!
I am not dry.
I think so too; dry, and so young? ’Twere strange.
Come prithee, drink to the Queen, my mother.
You shall rule me.—Unto that beauteous majesty!
Thanks, noble sir.
I must be wary; my mind’s dangerous.—
I’ll pledge you anon, sir.
Heart! How contempt ill fortune does pursue!
Not drink, nor pledge: what was she born to do?
I’ll stay no longer, lest I get that flame
Which nothing but cold death can quench or tame.—
Zenarchus, come. 
I go.—
Music of mind to the Queen.
To you no less.
And all that you can wish, or I express. 
Thanks to our son!—
Th’other took leave in silence, but left me
To speak enough both for myself and he.
Tymethes? That’s his name. Poor heart, take heed:
Look well into th’event ere thou proceed.
Love, yet be wise; impossible, none can.
If e’er the wise man claim one foolish hour,
’Tis when he loves; he’s then in folly’s power.
I need not fear the servants that o’erwatch me;
Their faiths lie in my coffers, in effect,
More true to me than to my lord’s suspèct.
The fears and dangers that most threaten me
Live in the party that I must enjoy,
And that’s Tymethes. Men are apt to boast.
He may in full cups blaze and vaunt himself
Unto some meaner mistress, make my shame
The politic engine to beat down her name,
And from thence force a way to the King’s ears.
Strange fate: where my love keeps, there keep my fears.
Alone? Why, where’s her guard? Suffer her alone?
Her thoughts may work; their powers are not her own.
Women have of themselves no entire sway;
Like dial needles they wave every way,
And must be throughly taught to be kept right
And point to none but to their lord’s delight.
Time to convey and plot? Leave her alone!—
Why, villains!
Kiss me, my perfectïon.
This night we’ll banquet in these blissful arms.
Your nights are music, and your words are charms.
Kiss me again, fair Thetis.
My lady is scarce perfect in her thoughts,
Howe’er she framed a smile upon the tyrant.
I have some skill in faces—and yet they never were
more deceitful. A man can scarce know a bawd from
a midwife by the face, an hypocritical puritan from
a devout Christian, if you go by the face. Well, all’s
not straight in my lady. She hath certain crooked
cogitations, if a man had the liberty to search ’em.
If aught point at my advice or performance, she may
fortunately disclose it: she knows my mettle, and what
it yields to an ounce. She cannot be deceived in’t:
here’s service, and secrecy, and no lady can wish more,
beside a monkey. She is assured of our faculties; there’s
none of us all that stand her smock-sentinels but would
venture a joint to do her any pleasurable service, and
I think that’s as much as any woman desires.—Mass,
here she comes.
’Tis some strange physic; I know by the working.
It cannot be kept down with any argument.
’Tis of aspiring force; sparks fly not downward,
No more this rèceived fancy of Tymethes.
I threaten it with my lord’s jealousy,
Yet still it rises against all objections.
I see my dangers, in what fears I dwell;
There’s but a plank on which I run to hell,
Yet were’t thrice narrower I should venture on.
None dares do more for sin than woman can.
Misery of love—Roxano? I am observed.—
What news, Roxano?
None that’s good, madam.
No? Which is the bad?
The worst of all is, madam, you are sad.
Indeed I am not merry.
Would I knew the means would make you so!
I would turn myself into any shape or office
To be the author on’t, sweet lady.
Troth, I have that hope of thee, I think thou wouldst.
Think it? ’Sfoot, you might swear safely in that action
And never hurt your oath. I ne’er failed yet.
’Twere sin to injure thee; I know thou didst not.
Nay, I know I did not.
But, my trusty servant,
This plot requires art, secrecy and wit,
Yet out of all can hardly work one safety.
Not one? That’s strange. I would ’twere put to me.
I’ll make it arrive safe whate’er it be.
Thou couldst not, my Roxano. Why, admit I love,
Now I come to thee.
Admit you love?
Why, all’s safe enough yet.
Ay, but a stranger?
Nay, now we are all spoiled, lady. I may look for
my brains in my boots—now you have put home to me
indeed, madam. A stranger? There’s a hundred deaths
i’th’ very name, besides vantage.
I said I should affright thee.
Faith, no fool can fright me, madam, commonly
called a stranger.
Hast thou the will? Or dar’st thou do me good?
Do thee good, sweet lady? As far as I am able,
ne’er doubt it. Let me but cast about for safety, and I’ll
do anything, madam.
Ay, ay, our safeties, which are mere impossibles.
Love forgets all things but its proper objects.
What is he? And his name?
Tymethes, in a most unlucky minute
Led hither by our son-in-law Zenarchus.
Hmm. . . is that the most fortunate, spidercatching,
smock-wrapped gentleman?
Yet if he know me—
What then?
I am undone.
And is it possible a man should lie with a woman,
and yet not know her? And yet ’tis possible too—
Thank my invention, follow that game still.
He must not know me. Then I love no further,
Although for not enjoying him I die.
My lord’s pale jealousy does so o’erlook me
That if Tymethes know what he enjoys
It may make way unto my lord’s mistrust;
Then, since in my desire such horrors move,
I’ll die no other than the death of love.
Lady! Madam, do you hear? Have you leisure to
swoon now, when I have taken such pains i’th’ business
to take order for your safety, set all things right? Why, Madam!
What says the man?
Why, he says like a gentleman, every inch of
him, and will perform the office of a gentleman: bring
you together, put you together, and leave you together.
What gentleman can do more?
And all this safely?
And all this safely. Ay, by this hand will I, or
else would I might never do anything to purpose. 
If he have but the first part of a young gentleman in him, ’tis
granted, madam. I have crotchets in my brain that you
shall see him and enjoy him, and he not know where
he is, nor who it is.
How? Shall he not know me? 
Why ’tis the least part of my meaning he should,
lady. Do you think you could possibly be safe, an he
know you? Why, some of your young gallants are of
that vainglorious and preposterous humour that if they
lay with their own sisters you should hear ’em prate 
on’t! This is too usual. There’s no wonder in’t. What I
have said, I will swear to perform: you shall enjoy him
ere night, and he not know you next morning.
Thou art not only necessary but pleasing,
There, catch our bounty.
Manage all but right,
As now with gold, with honours we’ll requite.
I am your creature, lady. 
Pretty gold, And by this light methinks most easily earned.
There’s no faculty, say I, like a pander, and that makes
so many nowadays die i’th’ trade. I have your gold,
lady, And eke your service. I am one step higher;
This office makes a gentleman a squire. 
Come, fellow Corydon, are the pits digged?
Ay, and as deep as an usurer’s conscience, I
warrant thee.
Mass, and that’s deep enough; 
’twill devour a widow and three orphans at a breakfast. Soft,
is this it?
Ay, ay, this is it.
Nay, for the deepness I’ll be sworn. But come,
my masters, and lay these boughs crossover, so, so,
artificially, and may all those whoreson muttonmongers
the wolves hole here, which eat our sheep.
I wonder what wolves those are which
eat our sheep, whether they be he-wolves or shewolves?
They should be he-wolves by their loving mutton,
But by their greediness they should be she-wolves,
For the belly of a she-wolf
Is never satisfied till it be dammed up.
Why are the she-wolves worse than the he’s?
Why, is not the dam worse than the devil, pray?
You have answered me there indeed.
Why, man, if all the earth were parchment, the
sea ink, every stick a pen, and every knave a scrivener,
they were not all able to write down the knaveries of she-wolves.
A murrain on them, he’s or she’s! They
suck the blood of none but our lambs.
O always the weakest goes to the wall—as for
example, knock down a sheep and he tumbles forwards,
knock down a woman and she tumbles backwards.
Sirrah, I wonder how many sorts of wolves there be?
Marry, just as many sorts as there be knaves in the cards.
Why, that’s four.
First, there are your court-wolves, and those be
foul eaters and clean drinkers.
And why ‘clean drinkers’?
Why, because when they be drunk they commonly
cast up all, and so make cleansing work on’t.
So sir, those are clean drinkers, indeed.
The next are your country-wolves: nothing chokes
them but plenty. They sing like sirens when corn goes
out by shipfulls, and dance after no tune but after ‘an
angel a bushel’.
The halter take such corn-cutters!
Are there no city-wolves?
A rope on them! Yes, huge routs, you shall have
Long Lane full of them. They’ll feed upon any whore,
carrion, thief, or anything.
Have they such maws?
Maws? Why, man, fiddlers have no better guts.
I have known some of them eat up a lord at three bites.
Three bonds, you mean.
A knight is nobody with them; a young gentleman 
is swallowed whole, like a gudgeon.
I wonder that gudgeon does not choke him.
A gudgeon choke him? If the throat of his conscience
be sound, he’ll gulp down anything. Five of 
your silken gallants are swallowed easier than a damask
prune—for our city-wolves do so roll my young prodigal
first in wax (which is soft), till he look like a gilded pill,
and then so finely wrap him up in satin (which is sleek),
that he goes down without chewing, and thereupon 
they are called slippery gallants.
I’ll be no gentleman for that trick.
The last is your sea-wolf, a horrible ravener too:
he has a belly as big as a ship, and devours as much
silk at a gulp as would serve forty dozen tailors against
a Christmas Day or a running at tilt.
Well, well, now our trap is set what shall
we do with the wolves we catch?
Why, those that are great ones and more than
our matches we’ll let go, and the lesser wolves we will 
hang: shall it be so?
Ay, ay, each man to his stand.
Foul monster-monger, who must live by that
Which is thy own destruction: why should men
Be nature’s bond-slaves? Every creature else
Comes freely to the table of the earth;
That which for man alone doth all things bear
Scarce gives him his true diet anywhere.
What spiteful winds breathe here, that not a tree
Spreads forth a friendly arm? Distressèd Queen,
And most accursèd babes! The earth that bears you
Like a proud mother scorns to give you food.
Ha! Thanks, fate! I now defy thee, starveling hunger.
Blessed tree, four lives grow in thy fruit. Run, taste it then:
Wise men serve first themselves, then other men.
O me accursèd and most miserable!
Help, help! Some angel lay a list’ning ear
To draw my cry up!—None to lend help? O,
Then pine and die.
A wolf caught, a wolf caught!
O help! I am no wolf, good friend.
No? What art thou then?
A miserable wretch.
An usurer?
No, no.
A broker then?
Mock not a man in woe: in a green wound
Pour balsam, and not physic.
’Snails, he talks like a surgeon.—If you be one,
why do you not help yourself, sir?
I am no surgeon, friend; my name’s Lapyrus.
How? A wolf caught, ho!—Lap what Lap ho!
Lapyrus is my name; dost thou not know me?
Yes, for a wolfish rascal that would have worried
his own country.
Torture me not, I prithee. I am that wretch;
A villain I was once, but I am now—
The devil in the vault! You, sirrah, that betrayed
your country and the old King your uncle, there lie till
one wolf devour another, thou treacherous rascal.
O me! most miserable and wretched creature!
I now do find there’s a revenging fate
That dooms bad men to be unfortunate.
We are observed.
By whom?
Mazeres follows us.
O, he’s my protested servant, your sole rival.
The devil he is!
You’ll make a hot suitor of him anon.
He may be hot in th’end; his good parts sue for’t. 
He eyes us still.
He does. You shall depart, lady.
I’ll take my leave o’ purpose in his presence.
He’s jealous, and a kiss runs through his heart:
I’ll make a thrust at him upon your lip.
Death! Minute favours? Every step a kiss? 
I think they count how the day goes by kissing;
’Tis past four since I met ’em.
I’ve hit him in the gall; instead of blood,
He sheds distractions, which are worse than wounds.
But sirrah!
Stays he to prove my rival? Cursed be th’hour
Wherein I advised the King for his stay here!
I have set slaves t’entrap him, yet none prosper.
I’ll lay no more my faith upon their works.
They’re weak and loose and like a rotten wall;
Leaning on them may hazard my own fall.
I’ll use a swifter course, cut off long journeys
And tedious ways that run my hopes past breath:
I’ll take the plain roadway and hunt his death. 
So, so, he departs with a knit brow! No matter.
When his frown begets earthquakes, haply then
’Twill shake me too. I shall stand firm till then.
Mass, here a walks. I am far enough from myself.
I challenge all disguises except drinking
To hide me better; I give way to that—
for that indeed will thrust a white gentleman into a suit
of mud. But whist, I begin to be noted.
Ay, he changed upon’t.
I marked him.
Good your honours,
your most comfortable charitable relief and devotion to
a poor star-crossed gentleman.
Pox on thee!
I’m bare enough already, if it like your honour.
He did?
‘Pox on thee’? Your young gallants love to
give no alms, but that that will stick by a man; that’s
one virtue in ’em. He’s not content to have my hat off,
but he would have my hair off too. [To Tymethes] Thank
your good lordship!
No! Was that his action?
It called him lord.
Nay, he’s a villain.
Good your honours! I have been a man
in my time—
Why, what art thou now?
—kept goodly beasts, had three wives, two men
uprising, three maids down lying. O good your kind honours!
’Sfoot, I am a beggar myself.
Perhaps your lordship gets by it. Good your sweet honour!
This fellow would be whipped.
Your Lordship has forgot since you were a beggar.
I’ll give thee somewhat for that jest in truth.
But now you are in private, shut your purse, and open your ear, sir.
How?
He’s dealing his devotion; hinder him not.
I am not literally a beggar, as puritanical as I appear. 
The naked truth is you are happily desired—
Ha?
 —of the most sweet, delicate, divine, pleasing,
ravishing creature—
Peace, peace, prithee peace!
—that ever made man’s wishes perfect.
Nay, say not so. I saw one creature lately
Exceeds all human form for true perfection:
This may be beauteous—
This for white and red, sir!
Her honour and my oath sue for that pardon:
You must not know her name, nor see her face.
How?
She rather chooseth death in her neglect
Than so to hazard life or lose respect.
How shall I come at her?
Let your will
Subscribe to the sure means already wrought,
She shall be safely pleased, you safely brought.
Ha! And is this sheer faith, without any trick in’t?
Let me perish in this office else; and I need wish
No more damnation than to die a pander.
Thou speakest well. When meet we?
Five is the fixèd hour, upon tomorrow’s evening.
So, the place?
Near to the further lodge.
Go to then! It holds honest all the way?
Else does there live no honesty but in lawyers.
Enough. Five? And the furthest lodge? I’ll meet thee.
Enjoy the sweetest treasure in a woman. 
Always excepting but the tyrant’s gem.
What, have you done with the beggar?
None that lives can say he has done with the beggar.
Hold conference so long with such a fellow?
How? Are your wits perfect? If one should refuse
To talk with every beggar, he might refuse
Brave company sometimes—gallants, i’faith. 
The loss of my dear Queen afflicts me more
Than all Lapyrus’ cursèd treacheries:
Inhuman monster!
If you have human forms to fit those voices
And hearts that may be pierced with misery’s groans
Sent from a fainting spirit, pity a wretch,
A miserable man, prisoner to darkness!
Your charitable strengths this way repair,
And lift my flesh to the reviving air.
Alas, some travelling man, by night outstripped,
Missing his way, into this danger slipped.
Set all our hands to help him.—Come, good man,
They that sit high may make their ends below.
Millions of thanks and praises!
You’re heavy, sir, whoe’er you be.
There’s weight within keeps down my soul and me.
One full strength more Makes our pains happy;
poor strength helps the poor.
So sir, you’re welcome to—Lapyrus? O!
We do forgive thy treachery: revive.
’Tis pity, and not hate, makes goodness thrive.
O that astonishment had left me dead!
Shame, sitting on my brow, weighs down my head.
Even thus the guilt of my abhorrèd sin
Flashed in my face when I beheld the Queen.
Our Queen! O, where, Lapyrus? Tell the rest.
Within this forest with her babes distressed.
Which way? Lead, dear Lapyrus.
Follow me then.
Not only shall we quit thy soul’s offence
But give thy happy labour recompense. 
The miserable Queen expecting still
The infants’ succour from Lapyrus’ hand
(Who wants himself), it chanced through èxtreme want
The youngest died, and this so near his end
That had not shepherds happily passed by
And on the babe cast a compassionate eye
And snatched the child out of the arms of death
(Where the sad mother left it), the same hour
Had been his grave that gives his life new power.
Thus the distressèd Queen, to them unknown,
Was as a nurse received unto her own—
Whose sight Lapyrus missing, having led
The King her husband to this hapless place,
They all depart in èxtreme height of grief
To get unto their own sad wants relief.
This is the farther lodge, the place of meeting;
The hour scarce come yet. Well, I was not born to this.
There’s not a hair to choose betwixt me and a pander
in this case, shift it off as well as I can. I do envy
this fellow’s happiness now, and could cut his throat at
pleasure. I could e’en gnaw feathers now to think of his
downy felicity. I that could never aspire above a dairy
wench, the very cream of my fortunes—that he should
bathe in nectar, and I most unfortunate in buttermilk,
this is good dealing now, is’t?
I’ll have some other, for he must not live.
Who’s this? My lord Mazeres, discontent?
He’s been to seek me twice, and privately.
I wonder at the business. I’m no statesman:
if I be, ’tis more than I know. I protest therefore, I dare
not call it in question. What should he make with me?
I’ll discover myself to him. If th’other come i’th’ mean
time, so I may be caught bravely; yet ’tis scarce the
hour. I’ll put it to the trial.
Roxano in my judgement had been fittest,
And farthest from suspèct of such a deed,
Because he keeps i’th’ castle.
My loved lord.
Roxano!
The same, my lord.
I was to seek thee twice.
Tell me Roxano, have I any power in thee?
Do I move there, or any part of me
Flow in thy blood?
As far as life, my lord.
As far as love, man, I ask no further.
Touch me then, my lord, And try my mettle.
First, there’s gold for thee,
After which follow favour, eminence,
And all those gifts which fortune calls her own.
Well, my lord.
There’s one Tymethes, son to the banished King,
Lives about court; Zenarchus gives him grace.
That fellow’s my disease. I thrive not with him.
He’s like a prison chain shook in my ears.
I take no sleep for him; his favours mad me.
My honours and my dignities are dreams
When I behold him. That right arm can ease me.
I will not boast my bounties, but forever
Live rich and happy. Thou art wise; farewell. 
Hmm, what news is here now? ‘Thou art wise;
farewell’? By my troth, I think it is a part of wisdom
to take gold when it is offered. Many wise men will
do’t: that I learned of my learnèd counsel. This is
worth thinking on now. To kill Tymethes, so strangely
beloved by a lady, and so monstrously detested by a
lord? Here’s gold to bring Tymethes, and here’s gold to
kill Tymethes. Ay, let me see, which weighs heaviest?
By my faith, I think the killing gold will carry’t! I shall,
like many a bad lawyer, run my conscience upon the
greatest fee: who gives most is like to fare best. I like my
safety so much the worse in this business in that Lord
Mazeres is his professed enemy. He’s the King’s bosom:
he blows his thoughts into him. And I had rather be
torn with whirlwinds than fall into any of their furies.
Troth, as far as I can see, the wisest course is to play
the knave, lay open this venery, betray him.—But see,
my lord again.
Hast thou thought of me? May I do good upon thee?
I’ll out of recreation make thee worthy,
Play honours to thy hand.
My lord?
Art thou resolved an I will be thy lord?
It will appear I am so.
Be proud of your revenge before I name it.
Never was man so fortunate in his hate.
I’ll give you a whole age but to think how.
Thou mak’st me thirst.
Tymethes meets me here.
Here? Excellent! On, Roxano: he meets thee here . . .
I meant at first to betray all to you, sir:
Understand that, my lord.
I’faith, I do.
Then thus, my lord—he comes.
Withdraw behind the lodge; relate it briefly.
A delicate sweet creature? ’Slight, who should it be?
I must not know her name, nor see her face?
It may be some trick to have my bones bastinadoed well,
and so sent back again. What say you to a blanketting?
Faith, so ’twere done by a lady and her chambermaids I
care not, for if they toss me i’th’ blankets I’ll toss them
i’th’ sheets, and that’s one for th’other. A man may
be led into a thousand villainies. But the fellow swore
enough, and here’s blood apt enough to believe him.
I both admire the deed, and my revenge.
My lord, I’ll make your way.
Thou mak’st thy friend.
Art come? We meet e’en jump upon a minute.
Ay, but you’ll play the better jumper of the two;
I shall not jump so near as you by a handful.
How! At a running leap?
That is more hard:
At a running leap you may give me a handful.
So, so, what’s to be done?
Nothing but put this hood over your head.
How? I never went blindfold before.
You never went otherwise, sir, for all folly is blind.
Besides, sir, when we see the sin we act,
We think each trivial crime a bloody fact.
Well followed of a servingman.
Servingmen always follow their masters, sir.
No, not in their mistresses.
There I leave you, sir.
I desire to be left when I come there, sir.
But faith, sincerely, is there no trick in this?
Prithee deal honestly with me.
Honestly? if protestation be not honest, 
I know not what to call it.
Why, if she affect me
So truly, she might trust me with her knowledge.
I could be secret to her chief actions: why, I love women
too well—
She’ll trust you the worse for that, sir. 
Why, because I love women?
O sir, ’tis most common:
He that loves women, is ne’er true to woman.
Experience daily proves he loveth none
With a true heart, that affects more than one.
Your wit runs nimbly, sir; pray use your pleasure. 
Why then, good night, sir.
Mass, the candle’s out.
O sir, the better sports taste best i’th’ night,
And what we do i’th’ dark, we hate i’th’ light.
A good doer mayst thou prove, for thy experience.
Come, give me thy hand. Thou mayst prove an honest
lad; But however, I’ll trust thee.
O sir, first try me.
But we protract good hours. Come, follow me, sir.—
Why, this is right your sportive gallants’ prize:
Before they’ll lose their sport, they’ll lose their eyes.
O my fear-fighting blood! Are you all here?
All at your pleasure, madam.
That’s my wish, and my opinïon
Hath ever been persuaded of your truths,
And I have found you willing t’all employments
We put into your charge.
In our faiths, madam.
For we are bound in duty to your bounty.
Will you to what I shall prescribe swear secrecy?
Try us, sweet lady, and you shall prove our faiths.
To all things that you hear or see,
I swear you all to secrecy.
I pour my life into your breasts;
There my doom or safety rests.
If you prove untrue to all,
Now I rather choose to fall
With loss of my desire, than light
Into the tyrant’s wrathful spite.
But in vain I doubt your trust.
I never found your hearts but just.
On this book your vows arrive,
And, as in truth, in favour thrive.
We wish no higher; so we swear.
Like jewels all your vows I’ll wear.
Here, take this paper; there those secrets dwell.
Go read your charge, which I should blush to tell.
All’s sure; I nothing doubt of safety now,
To which each servant hath combined his vow.
Roxano, that begins it trustily—
I cannot choose but praise him. He’s so needful.
There’s nothing can be done about a lady
But he is for it. Honest Roxano!
Even from our head to feet he’s so officious.
The time draws on. I feel the minute’s here.
No clock so true as love that strikes in fear. 
How far lack I yet of my blind pilgrimage?
Whist, Roxano!
You are at your— In, my lord, away:
I’ll help you to a disguise.
Enough. 
Methinks I walk in a vault all underground.
And now your long lost eyes again are found.
Good morrow, sir.
By the mass, the day breaks.
Rest here, my lord, and you shall find content
Catch your desires; stay here, they shall be sent.
Though it be night, ’tis morning to that night
Which brought me hither.
Ha! The ground spread with arras? What place is this?
Rich hangings? Fair room gloriously furnished?
Lights and their lustre? Riches and their splendour?
’Tis no mean creature’s, these dumb tokens witness.
Troth, I begin t’affect my hostess better.
I love her in her absence, though unknown,
For courtly form that’s here observed and shown.
Valesta? Yes, the same. ’Tis my lady’s pleasure
You give to me your coat and visor, and attend without
Till she employ you. 
So, now this disguise
Serves for my lord Mazeres, for he watches
But fit occasion.—Lecher, now beware.
Securely sit and fearless quaff and eat:
You’ll find sour sauce still, after your sweet meat.
The servants all in visors? By this light,
I do admire the carriage of her love—
For I account that woman above wise
Can sin and hide the shame from a man’s eyes.
They never do their easy sex more wrong
Than when they venture fame upon man’s tongue.
Yet I could swear concealment in love’s plot,
But happy woman that believes me not.
Whate’er is spoke, o’er to be spoke seems fit.
All still concludes her happiness and wit.
This banquet from her own hand rèceived grace,
Herself prepared it for you—as appears
By the choice sweets it yields, able to move
A man past sense to the delights of love.
I bid you welcome as her most prized guest,
First to this banquet, next to pleasure’s feast.
Whoe’er she be, we thank her and commend
Her care and love to entertain a friend.
That speaks her sex’s rareness, for to woman
The darkest path love treads is clear and common.
She wishes your content may be as great
As if her presence filled that other seat.
Convey my thanks to her, and fill some wine.
My lord?
My lord Mazeres caught the office.
I can’t but laugh to see how well he plays
The devil in a visor,
Damns where he crouches. Little thinks the prince
Under that face lurks his life’s enemy.
Yet he but keeps the fashion: great men kill
As flatterers stab, who laugh when they mean ill.
Now could I poison him fitly, aptly, rarely.
My vengeance speaks me happy: there it goes.
Some wine!
It comes, my lord.
My lady begun to you, sir, and doth commend
This to your heart, and with it her affection.
I’ll pledge her thankfully.
There!—Remove that.
And in this my revenge must be removed
Where first I left it. Now my abusèd wrath
Pursues thy ruin in this dangerous path.
That cup hath quite dashed my lord Mazeres.
Return my faith, my reverence, my respect,
And tell her this, which courteously I find:
She hides her face, but lets me see her mind.
I would not taste of such a banquet to feel
that which follows it for the love of an empress. ’Tis
more dangerous to be a lecher than to enter upon a
breach. Yet how securely he munches!
His thoughts are sweeter than the very meats before him.
He little dreams of his destructïon,
His horrid fearful ruin, which cannot be withstood.
The end of venery is disease or blood.
I have not known one happier for his pleasure
Than in that state we are. ’Tis a strange trick,
And sweetly carried. By this light, a delicate creature!
And should have a good face, if all hit right.
For they that have good bodies and bad faces
Were all mismatched, and made up in blind places.
The wind and tide serve, sir; you have lighted
Upon a sea of pleasure. Here’s your sail, sir,
And your top streamer: a fair-wrought shirt and nightcap.
I shall make A sweet voyage of this.
Ay, if you knew all, sir.
Is not all known yet? What’s to be told?
Five hundred crowns in the shirt sleeve in gold.
How?
’Tis my good lady’s pleasure.
No clouds eclipse her bounty; she shines clear.
Some like that pleasure best that costs most dear.
Yet I think your lordship is not of that mind now.
You like that best that brings a banquet with it,
And five hundred crowns.
Ay, by this light do I.
And I think thou art of my mind.
We jump somewhat near, sir.
But what does she mean to reward me aforehand?
I may prove a eunuch now, for aught she knows.
O sir, I ne’er knew any of your hair but he was
absolute at the game.
Faith, we are much of a colour. But here’s a
note; what says it?
Our love and bounty shall increase
So long as you regard our peace.
Unless your life you would forego,
Who we are, seek not to know.
Enjoy me freely: for your sake
This dangerous shift I undertake.
Be therefore wise; keep safe your breath.
You cannot see me under death.
I’d be loth to venture so far for the sight of any creature
under heaven.
Nay, sir, I think you may see a thousand faces better cheap.
Well, I will shift me instantly, and be content
With my groping fortune. 
O sir, you’ll grope to purpose. 
I’ll after thee,
And see the measure of my vengeance upheaped.
His ruin is my charge. I have seen that
This night would make one blush thorough this visor.
Like lightning in a tempest her lust shows,
Or drinking drunk in thunder, horrible—
For on this act a thousand dangers wait.
The King will seize him in his burning fury
And seal his vengeance on his reeking breast.
Though I make pander’s use of ear and eye,
No office’ vile to damn mine enemy.
This course is but the first. ’Twill not rest there;
The next shall change him into fire and air. 
Nay, did e’er subtlety match it?
’Slight, led to a lady hoodwinked,
Placèd in state and banqueted in visors!
All, by this light: but all this nothing was
To the delicious pleasures of her bed.
Who should this be?
Nay, enquire not, brother.
I’d give one eye to see her with the other.
Seest thou this jewel? In the midst of night
I slipped it from her veil, unfelt of her.
’T may be so kind unto me as to bring
Her beauty to my knowledge.
Canst not guess at her,
Nor at the place?
At neither, for my heart.
Why, I’ll tell thee, man, ’twas handled with such art,
Such admired cunning, what with my blindness
And their general darkness, that when mine eyes
Received their liberty I was ne’er the nearer.
To them in full form I appeared unshrouded,
But all their sights to me were masked and clouded.
’Fore heaven, I do admire the cunning on’t.
Nay, you cannot outvie my admiration.
I had a feeling on’t, beyond your passion.
Well, blow this over; see, our sister comes.
Art sure, Mazeres, that he courts our daughter?
I’m sure of more, my lord: she favours him.
That beggar?
Worse my lord, that villain traitor—
And yet worse my lord.
How?
Pardon, my lord, a riper time
Shall bring him forth. Behold him there, my lord.
Dares she so far forget respect to us,
And dim her own lustre to give him grace?
Favours are grown to custom ’twixt ’em both:
Letters, close banquets, whisperings, private meetings.
I’ll make ’em dangerous meetings.
In faith, my lord, I’ll have this jewel.
’Tis not my gift, lady.
What’s that, Mazeres?
Marry, my lord, she courtly begs a jewel of him,
Which he keeps back as courtly with fair words.
I’ve sworn, my lord.
Why, upon that condition
You’ll keep it safe and close from all strange eyes,
Not wronging me, ’tis yours.
I swear.
It shall suffice.
’Tis hers, my lord, at which they part in kisses.
I’ll make those meetings bitter. Both shall rue.
We have found Mazeres to this minute true.
No trick to see this lady? Heart of ill fortune!
The jewel that was begged from me too was
The hope I had to gain her wished-for knowledge.
Well, here’s a heart within will not be quiet.
The eye is the sweet feeder of the soul;
When the taste wants, that keeps the memory whole.
’Tis bad to be in darkness, all know well;
Then not to see her, what doth it want of hell?
What says the note?
Unless your life you would forego,
Whom we are, seek not to know.
Pish, all idle!
As if she’d suffer death to threaten me
Whom she so bounteously and firmly loves!
No trick? Excellent, ’twill fit; make use of that.
Enough, thou’rt honest. I affect thee much.
Go, train him to his ruin.
Let me alone, my lord: doubt not I’ll train him.
Perhaps sir, I have the art.
O, I know thy mind.
The further lodge?
Enough, I’ll meet thee presently.
Why so: I like one that will make an end—
of himself at few words.
A man that hath a quick perseverance in ill,
A leaping spirit, he’ll run through horror’s jaws
To catch a sin. But to o’ertake a virtue
He softly paces, like a man that’s sent
Some tedious, dark, unprofitable journey.
Corrupt is nature; she loves nothing more
Than what she most should hate. There’s nothing springs
Apace in man but grey hairs, cares, and sins. 
I’ll see her, come what can. But what can prove?
She cannot seek my death that seeks my love. 
My lord, what is the matter?
I know not what;
The King sent.
Well, we obey.
Here comes his highness. 
How now, what’s she?
I, my lord? Your highness
Knew me once: your most obedient daughter.
They lie that tell me so; this is not she.
No, my lord?
No, for as thou art I know thee not,
And I shall strive still to forget thee more.
Thou neither bear’st in memory my respects
Nor thy own worths. How can we think of thee
But as of a dejected worthless creature?—
So far beneath our grace and thy own lustre,
That we disdain to know thee.
Was there no choice ’mong our selected nobles
To make thy favourite, besides Tymethes?
Son to our enemy, a wretch, a beggar,
Dead to all fortunes, honours or their hopes;
Besides his breath, worth nothing. Abject wretch,
To place so vigorously thy affection
On him can ne’er requite it! Deny’t not.
We know the favours thou hast given him:
Pledges of love, close letters, private meetings,
And whisperings are customary ’twixt you.
Come, which be his gifts? Whereabout lie his pledges?
Your grace hath been injuriously informed.
I ne’er receivèd pledge.
Impudent creature,
When in our sight and hearing shamefully
Undervaluing thy best honours and setting by
All modesty of blood thou begged’st a jewel of him.
O pardon me, my lord, I had forgot: here ’tis.
That is the same, and all that e’er was his.
Ha! This! How came this hither?
I gave it you, my lord.
Who gave it thee?
Tymethes.
He! Who gave it him?
I know not that, my lord.
Then here it sticks.—Mazeres!
My lord?
’Tis my Queen’s, my Queen’s, Mazeres.
How to him came this?
I can resolve your highness.
Can Mazeres?
He is some ape: the husk falls from him now,
And you shall know his inside. He’s a villain,
A traitor to the pleasures of your bed.
O, I shall burst with torment.
He’s received this night
Into her bosom.
I feel a whirlwind in me
Ready to tear the frame of my mortality.
I traced him to the deed.
And saw it done?
I abused my eyes in the true survey on’t,
Tainted my hearing with lascivious sounds;
My loyalty did prompt me to be sure
Of what I found so wicked and impure.
’Tis springtide in my gall. All my blood’s bitter—
Puh, lungs too.
This night.
Lodovico!
My lord.
How cam’st thou up? Let’s hear.
My lord, my first beginning was a broker.
A knave from the beginning; there’s no hope of him.
Sertorio!
Here, my lord.
We know thee just.
How cam’st thou up? Let’s hear.
From no desert 
That I can challenge but your highness’ favour.
Thou art honest in that answer. Go:
Report we are forty leagues off rid forth:
Spread it about the castle cunningly.
I’ll do it faithfully, my lord.
Do’t cunningly.
Go! If thou shouldst do’t faithfully, thou liest.
I’m lost by violence through all my senses.
I’m blind with rage.—Mazeres, guide me forth.
I tread in air, and see no foot nor path;
I’ve lost myself, yet cannot lose my wrath.
What have I heard? It dares not be but true.
Tymethes taken in adulterate trains,
And with the Queen, my mother? Now I hate him,
As beauty abhors years, or usurers charity.
He does appear unto my eye a leper 
Full of sin’s black infection, foul adultery.
Cursèd be the hour in which I first did grace him
And let Mazeres starve in my disdain,
That hath so long observed me with true love,
Whose loyalty in this approves the same.
Madam.
My love?
‘My lord’ I should say, but would say ‘my love’.
I do beseech your grace for what I’ve done
Lay no oppressing censure upon me.
I could not but in honesty reveal it,
Not envying in that he was my rival
Nor in the force of any ancient grudge,
But as the deed in its own nature craved,
So ’mong the rest it was revealed to me, 
Appearing so detested that yourself,
Gracious and kind, had you but seen the manner,
Would have thrown by all pity and remorse
And took my office, or one more in force.
Rise, dear Mazeres, in our favours rise. 
So far am I from censure to reprove thee
That in my hate to him I choose and love thee.
If constant service may be called desert,
I shall deserve.
Man hath no better part.
Why, this was happily observed and followed.—
The King will to the castle late tonight
And tread through all the vaults; I must attend.
I wish that at first sight thou’dst forced his end. 
’Tis better thus. So my revenge imports.
Now thrive my plots! The end shall make me great:
She mine, the crown sits here. I am then complete.
So, leave us here awhile; bear back the light.
I would not be discovered if he come.
You know his entertainment. So, be gone.
I am not cheerful, troth, what point soe’er
My powers arrive at. I desire a league
With desolate darkness, and disconsolate fancies.
There is no music in my soul tonight.
What should I fear, when all my servants’ faiths
Sleep in my bounty, and no bribes nor threats
Can wake ’em from my safety? For the King,
He’s forty leagues rode forth; I heard it lately.
Yet heaviness, like a tyrant, proud in night,
Usurps my power, rules where it hath no right.
Methinks this a longer voyage than the first?
Pleasures once tasted makes the next seem worse.
Is that the trick?
O sir, experience proves it.
You came at first to enjoy what you ne’er knew;
Now all is but the same whate’er you do.
I’ll prove that false: the sight of her is new.
I have forgot a business to my lord Mazeres;
My safety to the King relies upon’t.
You are in the house, my lord: this is the withdrawing room.
I see nothing.
No matter, sir, as long as you have feeling enough.
Is the hood off?
’Tis here in my hand, sir.
I must crave pardon, leave you here awhile.
But as you love my safety and your own
Remove not from this room till my return.
Well, here’s my hand: I will not.
’Tis enough, sir.
Hist, art gone? Then boldly I step forth,
Cunning discoverer of an unknown beauty
As subtle as her plot. Thou art masked too:
Show me a little comfort, in this condensive darkness.
Play the flatterer: laugh in my face.
Why, here’s enough to pèrfect all my wishes.
With this I taste of that forbidden fruit
Which, as she says, death follows; death, ’twill sting.
Soft, what room’s this? Let’s see, ’tis not the former
I was entertained in; no, it somewhat differs:
Rich hangings still, court deckings, ay, and all—
O all that can be in man’s wish comprised
Is in thy love immortal, in thy graces!
I am not the same flesh; my touch is altered. 
Hast thou betrayed me? What hast thou attempted?
Nothing that can be prejudicïal
To the sweet peace of those illustrious graces.
O my most certain ruin!
Admirèd lady, hear me, hear my vow. 
O miserable youth, none saves thee now.
By that which man holds dearest, dreadful Queen,
And all that can be in a vow contained,
I’ll prove as true, secret, and vigilant
As ever man observed with serious virtue 
The dreadful call of his departing soul.
Your own soul to your secrets shall not prove more true
Than mine to it, to them, to all, to you.
O misery of affection built on breath!
Were I as far past my belief in heaven
As in man’s oaths, I were the foulest devil.
May I eat and ne’er be nourishèd,
Live and know nothing, love without enjoying,
If ever—
Come, this is more than needs.
There’s comfort then.
You that profess such truth, shall I enjoin you
To one poor penance then to try your faith?
Be’t what it will, command it.
Spend but this hour, wherein you have offended,
In true repentance of your sin, and all
Your hasty youth stands guilty of—and being clear,
You shall enjoy that which you hold most dear.
And if this penance I perform not truly,
May I henceforth ne’er be received to favour.
Why then, I’ll leave you to your task awhile.
Most wretched, doubtful, strange-distracted woman,
E’en drawn in pieces betwixt love and fear,
I weep in thought of both. Bold venturous youth,
Twice I writ death, yet would he seek to know me.
He’ll make no conscience where his oaths bestow me.
I’m glad all’s so well past, and she appeased.
I swear I did expect a harder penance
When she began to enjoin me. Why, this is wholesome
For soul and body, though I seldom use it.
Her wisdom is as pleasing as her beauty.
I never knew affection hastier born,
With more true art and less suspicïon.
It so amazed me to know her my mistress,
I had no power to close the light again,
Unhappy that I was.—Peace, here she comes.
Down to thy penance: think of thy whole youth.
From the first minute that the womb conceived me
To this full-heapèd hour, I do repent me,
With heart as penitent as a man dissolving,
Of all my sins, born with me, and born of me,
Dishonest thoughts and sleights, the paths of youth.
So thrive in mercy as I end in truth!
Fly to thy wish! I pray it may be given.
Man in a twinkling is in earth and heaven.
I dealt not like a coward with thy soul,
Nor took it unprepared. 
I gave him time to put his armour on
And sent him forth like a celestial champion.
I loved thee with more care and truer moan,
Since thou must die, to taste more deaths than one.
Too much by this pity and love confesses.
Had any warning fast’ned on thy senses, [ ].
Rash, unadvisèd youth, whom my soul weeps for,
How oft I told thee this attempt was death!
Yet would’st thou venture on, fond man, and knew?
But what destruction will not youth pursue?
Here long mightst thou have lived, been loved, enjoyed,
Had not thy will thy happiness destroyed!
Thought’st thou by oaths to have thy deeds well borne?
Thou shouldst have come when man was ne’er forsworn.
They are dangerous now; witness this breach of thine.
Who’s false to his own faith, will ne’er keep mine.
We must be safe, young man, the deeds unknown.
There are more loves; honours, no more than one.
Yet spite of death, I’ll kiss thee.
O strange ill, 
That for our fears we should our comforts kill!
Whom shall I trust with this poor bleeding body?
Yonder’s a secret vault runs through the castle;
There for a while convey him. Hapless boy,
That never knew how dear ’twas to enjoy! 
O I’m confounded everlastingly,
Damned to a thousand tortures in that sight.
What shall I frame?—My lord!
What’s she?
O my sweet dearest lord!
Thy name?
Thy poor affrighted and endangered Queen.
O, I know thee now.
Did not your majesty hear the piteous shrieks
Of an enforcèd lady?
Yes, whose were they?
Mine, my most worthy lord. Behold this villain,
Sealed with his just desert. Light here, my king.
This violent youth, whom till this night I saw not,
Being, as it seems, acquainted with the footsteps
Of that dark passage, broke through the vault upon me
And with a secret lantern searched me out,
And seized me at my orisons, alone,
And bringing me by violence to this room,
Far from my guard or any hope of rescue,
Intending here the ruin of my honour;
But in the strife, as the good gods ordained it,
Reaching for succour, I lighted on a pistol,
Which I presumed was not without his charge.
Then I redeemed mine honour from his lust,
So he that sought my fall lies in the dust.
O, let me embrace thee for a brave, unmatchable,
Precious, unvalued, admirable—whore.
Ha! What says my lord?
Come hither. Yet draw nearer. How came this man
To’s end? I would hear that. I would learn cunning.
Tell me that I may wonder, and so lose thee.
There is no art like this. Let me partake
A subtlety no devil can imitate.
Speak: why is all so contrary to time?
He down and you up? Ha, why thus?
I am sorry for my lord; I understand him not.
The deed is not so monstrous in itself 
As is the art which ponders home the deed.
The cunning doth amaze me past the sin,
That he should fall before my rage begin.
My lord?
Come hither yet. One of those left hands give me;
Thou hast no right at all.
What would my lord?
Nothing but put a ring upon a finger.
That’s a wrong finger for a ring, my lord.
And what was he on whom you bounteously
Bestowed this jewel?
I do not like that word.
Look well upon’t: dost know it? Ay, and start.
O heaven, how came this hither?
Your highness gave me this; this is mine own.
’Tis the same ring, but yet not the same stone.
Mystical strumpet, dost thou yet presume
Upon thy subtle strength? Shak’st thou not yet?
Or is it only art makes women constant,
Whom nature makes so loose?
I looked for gracious lightning from thy cheeks
(I see none yet), for a relenting eye 
(I can see no such sight). Lust keeps in all.—
My witness! Where’s my witness? Rise in the same form.
O I’m betrayed.
Is not yon woman an adulteress?
Yes, my good lord. 
Was not this fellow catched for her desire?
Brought in a mist? Banqueted and received
To all her amplest pleasures!
True, my lord:
I brought him, saw him feasted and received—
Down, down, we have too much.
O ’tis Roxano.
So, by this sleight I have deceived ’em both.
I’m took for him I strive to make her loathe.
Needs hear more witnesses? I’ll call up more.
O no, here lies a witness ’gainst myself
Sooner believed than all their hirèd faiths.
Doom me unto my death, only except
The lingering execution of your look;
Let me not live tormented in that brow.
I do confess.
O, I felt no quick till now.
All witnesses to this were but dead flesh;
I was insensible of all but this.
Would I had given my kingdom, so conditioned
That thou hadst ne’er confessed it.
Now I stand by the deed, see all in action,
The close conveyance, cunning passages,
The artful fetch, the whispering, close disguising,
The hour, the banquet, and the bawdy tapers,
All stick in mine eye together. Yet thou shalt live.
Torment me not with life; it asks but death.
O hadst thou not confessed! Hadst thou no sleight?
Where was thy cunning there?
I see it now in thy confessïon.
Thou shalt not die as long as this is meat.
Thou killed’st a buck which thou thyself shalt eat.
Dear sir?
Here’s deer struck dead with thy own hand;
’Tis venison for thy own tooth. Thou know’st the relish:
A dearer place hath been thy taster. Ho!
Sertorio! Lodovico!
Here, sir.
Drag hence that body; see it quartered straight.
No living wrath can I extend upon’t,
Else torments, horrors, gibbets, racks and wheels
Had with a thousand deaths presented him
Ere he had tasted one.—Yet thou shalt live.
Here, take this taper lighted, kneel, and weep.
I’ll try which is spent first, that or thine eye.
I’ll provide food for thee; thou shalt not die.
If there be hell for sins that men commit,
Marry a strumpet and she keeps the pit. 
I feared this misery long before it came.
My ominous dreams and fearful dreadfulness 
Promised this issue long before ’twas born.
Yonder she kneels, little suspecting me
The neat discoverer of her venery.
I were full safe had I Roxano’s life,
Which in this stream I fish for.—How now, lady? 
So near the earth suits not a living queen.
Under the earth were safer and far happier.
What is’t that can drive you to such discomforts,
To prize your glories at so mean a rate?
The treachery of my servants, good my lord. 
Dare they prove treacherous (most ignoble vassals!)
To the sweet peace of so divine a mistress?
I’m sure one villain, whom I dearly loved,
Of whom my trust had made election chief,
Perfidiously betrayed me to the fury 
Of my tempestuous unappeasèd lord.
Let me but know him, that I may bestow
My service to your grace upon his heart,
And thence deserve a mistress like yourself.
O me, too soon behold him!
Madam, stand by, 
Let him not see the light.
Now I expect reward.
He dies, were he my kinsman, for that guilt,
Though ’twere as far to’s heart as ’tis to th’ hilt.
Ha? What was that?
There’s a reward with a vengeance.
Fall villain, for betraying of thy lady. 
Such things must never creep about the earth
To poison the right use of service—a treacher!
This is some poor revenge. Thanks, good my lord.
Into that cave with him, from whence he rose
Not long since and betrayed me to the King.
O villain, in, and overtake thy soul.
Here’s a perplexèd breast: let that warm steel
Perform but the like service upon me,
And live the rarest friend to a queen’s wish.
O pardon me, that were too full of evil.
I threat not angels, though I smite the devil:
Doubt not your peace; the King will be appeased.
There I’ll bestow my service.
We are pleased.
As much as comes to nothing; I’ll not sue
To urge the King from that I urged him to. 
Betrayed where I reposed most trust? O heaven,
There is no misery fit match for mine.
So, bring ’em forward yet, there; there bestow ’em.
Before her eyes lay the divided limbs
Of her desirèd paramour. So. You’re welcome,
Lady, you see your cheer: fine flesh, coarse fare.
Sweet was your lust; what can be bitter there?
By heaven, no other food thy taste shall have,
Till in thy bowels those corpse find a grave.
Which to be sure of, come: I’ll lock thee safe
From the world’s pity.—Hang those quarters up!—
The bottom drink’s the worst in pleasure’s cup.
O my Tymethes! Truest joy on earth!
Hath thy fate proved so flinty, so perverse,
To the sweet spring both of thy youth and hopes?
This was Mazeres’ spite, that cursèd rival.
And if I fail not, his own plot shall shower
Upon his bosom like a falling tower.
My worthy lord.
O, you should have seen us sooner.
Why my lord?
The quarters of your friend passed by in triumph,
A sight that I presume had pleased you well.
I call a villain to my father’s pleasure
No friend of mine. The sight had pleased me better
Had I, not like Mazeres, run my hate
Into the sin before it grew to act,
And killed it ere’t had knotted. ’Twas rare service
(If your vexed majesty conceive it right)
In politic Mazeres, serving more
In this discovery his own vicious malice
Than any true peace that should make you perfect— 
Suffering the hateful treason to be done
He might have stopped in his confusïon.
Most certain.
Good your majesty, bethink you
In manly temper and considerate blood:
Went he the way of loyalty or your quiet, 
After he saw the courtesies exceed,
T’abuse your peace, and trust ’em with the deed?
O no, none but a traitor would have done it.
For my lord, weigh’t indifferently.
I do, I do.
What makes it heinous, burdensome and monstrous,
Fills you with such distractions, breeds such furies
In your incensèd breast, but the deed doing?
O!
Th’intent had been sufficient for his death,
And that full satisfaction; but the act— 
Insufferable.—
Sertorio! Where’s Sertorio?
My lord?
Seek out Mazeres suddenly. 
Peace, Zenarchus.
Let me alone to trap him.
It may prove.
Behold, my friend, how I express my love.
O villain! Had he pierced him at first sight,
Where I have one grief, I had missed ten thousand by’t.
I dreamt of some new honours
For my late service, and I wondered how
He could keep off so long from my desert.
Mazeres?
My loved lord.
I am forgetful.
I am in thy debt some dignities, Mazeres.
What shift shall we make for thee? Thy late service
Is warm still in our memory and dear favour.
Prithee, discover to’s the manner how
Thou took’st ’em subtly.
I was received Into a waiter’s room, my lord.
Thou wast!
And in a visor helped to serve the banquet.
Ha, ha!
Saw him conveyed into a chamber privately.
And still thou let’st him run?
I let him play, my lord.
Ha, ha, ha!
I watched still near, till her arms clasped him.
And there thou let’st him rest?
There he was caught, my lord.
So art thou here.—
Drag him to execution. He shall die
With tortures ’bove the thought of tyranny.
No words are able to express my gladness.
’Tis such a high born rapture that the soul
Partakes it only.
My lord Mazeres led Unto his death?
It proves too true, dear princess.
Cursed be the mouth that doomed him, and forever
Blasted the hand that parts him from his life.
Was there none fit to practise tyranny on
But whom our heart elected? Misery of love!
I must not live to think on’t.
Here’s my sister.
I could not bring that news will please her better.—
My news brings that command over your passions,
You must be merry.
Have you warrant for’t, brother?
Yes, strong enough, i’faith. Hear me: 
Mazeres By this time is at his everlasting home.
Where’er his body lies, I struck the stroke.
I wrought a bitter pill that quickly choked him.
O me, my soul will out!—Some wine there, ho! 
Wine for our sister!—for the news is worth it.
It will prove dear to both.—So, give it me.
Now leave us.
Revenge ne’er brought forth a more happy issue
Than I think mine to be.
I’m setting forth, Mazeres.—Here, Zenarchus!
Thou art not like this hour, jovial.
I shall be after this.
That does’t, if any.
Wine doth both help defects, and causeth many.
Here’s to the deed, faith, of our last revenge.
Dying men prophesy: faith, ’tis our last end.
Now I must tell you, brother, that I hate you,
In that you have betrayed my loved Mazeres.
What’s this?
His deed was loyal, his discovery just:
He brought to light a monster and his lust.
Nay, if you grow
So strumpet-like in your behaviour to me,
I’ll quickly cool that insolence.
Peace, peace.
There is a champion fights for me unseen;
I need not fear thy threats.
Indeed no harlot  But has her champion, besides bawd and varlet. 
O! Why, law you now! Such gear will ne’er thrive with you.
I’m sick of thy society, poison to mine eyes.
’Tis lower in thy breast the poison lies.
How?
’Tis for Mazeres.
O you virtuous powers!
What, a right strumpet? Poison, under love?
That man can ne’er be safe that divides love.
Nor she be honest can so soon impart.
O ’ware that woman that can shift her heart!
Ha? Thunder? And thou marrow-melting blast,
Quick-wingèd lightning, and thou blazing star,
I like not thy prodigious bearded fire.
Thy beams are fatal.
Ha! Behold the influence
Of all their malice in my children’s ruins!
Their states malignant powers have envìed,
And both in haste, struck with their envies, died.
’Tis ominous.—Within there!
Here, my lord.
Convey those bodies awhile from my sight.
Both dead, my lord.
Yes, and we safe; our death we need less fear.
Usurper’s issue oft proves dangerous:
We depose others, and they poison us.
I have found it on recòrds; ’tis better thus.
My lord, this castle is but slightly guarded. 
’Tis as I hoped and wished. Now bless us heaven!
What horrid and inhuman spectacle
Is yonder that presents itself to sight?
It seems three quarters of a man hung up.
What tyranny hath been exercised of late? 
I dare not venture on.
Fear not, my lord: our habits give us safety.
Behold, the tyrant maketh toward us.
Holy and reverent pilgrims, welcome!
Bold strangers, by the tempest beaten in. 
Most welcome still.
We are but stewards for such guests as you:
What we possess is yours, to your wants due.
We are only rich for your necessities.
A generous, free, and charitable mind 
Keeps in thy bosom, to poor pilgrims kind.
’Tis time of day to dine, my friends.—Sertorio!
My lord?
Our food.
’Tis ready for your highness.
Sit, pray sit, religious men, right welcome
Unto our cates. Grave sir, I have observed 
You waste the virtue of your serious eye
Too much on such a worthless object as that is.
A traitor when he lived called that his flesh;
Let’t hang. Here’s to you! We are the oldest here.
Round let it go. Feed, if you like your cheer.
My lord.
How now?
Ready, my lord.
Sit merry.
Where’er I look, these limbs are in mine eye.
Some wretch on whom he wrought his tyranny.
Hard was his fate to ’light into his mercy.
Peace, he comes.
I perceive strangers more desire to see
An object than the fare before them set.
But since your eyes are serious suitors grown,
I will discourse; what’s seen shall now be known.
Your bounty every way conquers poor strangers.
Yon creature whom your eyes so often visit
Held mighty sway over our powers and thoughts;
Indeed we were all hers.
Besides her graces, there were all perfections:
Unless she spoke, no music; till her wishes
Brought forth a monster, a detested issue,
Poisoning the thoughts I held of her.
She did from her own ardour undergo
Adulterous baseness with my professed foe.
Her lust strangely betrayed, I ready to surprise them,
Set on fire by the abuse, I found his life
Cunningly shifted by her own dear hand
And far enough conveyed from my revenge.
Unnaturally she first abused my heart,
And then prevented my revenge by art.
Yet there I left not. Though his trunk were cold,
My wrath was flaming, and I exercised
New vengeance on his carcass, and gave charge
The body should be quartered and hung up. ’Twas done.
This as a penance I enjoined her to:
To taste no other sustenance, no nor airs,
Till her love’s body be consumed in hers.
The sin was great; so is the penance grievous.
Our vow is signed.
And was he Lydian born?
He was no less. Son to mine enemy,
A banished king; Tymethes was his name.
O me, my son Tymethes!
Passion may spoil us.—Sir, we oft have heard
Of that old king, his father, and that justly
This kingdom was by right due to his sway.
It was; I think it was, till we (called in)
By policy and force deceived his confidence,
Showed him a trick of war and turned him out.
Sin’s boast is worse than sin.
All’s sure, the guards are seized on.
Good.
The passage strongly guarded.
Holy sir, what’s he?
Our brother, a poor pilgrim, that gives notice
Of a religious father that attends
To bear us company in our pilgrimage.
O ho, ’tis good, ’tis very good.
Alas, poor lady! 
It makes me weep to see what food she eats.
I know your mercy will remit this penance.
Never, our vow’s irrevocable, never.
The lecher must be swallowed rib by rib.
His flesh is sweet; it melts, and goes down merrily. 
Ha? What are these?
Speranza.
Ha?
Villain, this minute looses thee, thou tyrant.
Pilgrims wear arms? The old King? And Lapyrus?
Betrayed? Confounded? O, I must die forsworn.
Break, vow; bleed, whore.
There is my jealousy flown.
O happy man, ’tis more revenge to me
Than all your aims: I have killed my jealousy.
I have nothing now to care for. More than hell
’T had been if you had struck me ere she fell.
I had left her to your lust; the thought is bitterness.
But she first fall’n—ha, ha, ha!
Die, cruel murderous tyrant.
So laugh away this breath.
My lust was ne’er more pleasing than my death.
As full possessed as ever, and as rich
In subjects’ hearts and voices, we present thee
The complete sway of this usurpèd kingdom.
I am so borne betwixt the violent streams
Of joy and passion, I forget my state.
To all: our thanks and favours, and what more
We are in debt, to all your free consent
We will discharge in happy government.
The peaceful’st reign that ever prince enjoyed—
Already a petition? Suitors begin betimes.
We are scarce warm in our good fortune yet. What are you?
Unworthiest of all the joys this hour brings forth.
Our dearest Queen?
Your poor distressèd Queen.
O let me light upon that constant breast,
And kiss thee till my soul melt on thy lips.
Our joys were perfect, stood Tymethes there.
We are old; this kingdom wants a hopeful heir. 
Your joys are perfect, though he stand not there,
And your wish blessed: behold a hopeful heir!
Stand not amazed: ’tis Manophes.
How just the gods are, who in their due time
Return what they took from us.
Happy hour!
Heaven hath not taken all our happiness;
For though your elder met ill fate, good heaven
Hath thus preserved your younger for your heir.
Prepare those limbs for honourable burial.—
And, noble nephew, all your ill is lost
In your late new-born goodness, which we’ll reward.—
No storm of fate so fierce but time destroys,
And beats back misery with a peal of joys.