BYron fall'n in so tratrous a relaps,
Aleadgd for our ingratitude: what offices,
Titles of honor, and what admiration,
Could France afford him that it pourd not on?
When he was scarce arriu'd at forty yeares,
He ranne through all chiefe dignities of France.
At fourteene yeares of age he was made Colonell
To all the Suisses seruing then in Flanders;
Soone after he was marshall of the campe.
And shortly after, marshall Generall:
He was receiued high Admirall of France
In that our Parlament we held at Tours;
Marshall of France in that we held at Paris.
And at the Siege of Amiens he acknowledgd,
None his Superiour but our selfe, the King;
Though I had there the Princes of the blood,
I made him my Lieutennant Generall,
Declard him Ioyntly the prime Peere of France,
And raisd his Barony into a Duchy,
And yet (my Lord) all this could not allay
The fatall thrist of his ambition.
For some haue heard him say he would not die,
Till on the wings of valour he had reacht
One degree heigher; and had seene his head
Set on the royall Quarter of a crowne;
Yea at so vnbeleeu'd a pitch he aymd,
That he hath said his heart would still complaine,
Till he aspird the style of Soueraigne,
And from what ground my Lord rise all the leuyes
Now made in Italy? from whence should spring
The warlike humor of the Count Fuentes?
The restles stirrings of the Duke of Sauoye?
The discontent the Spaniard entertaind,
With such a threatning fury, when he heard
The preiudiciall conditions,
Propos'd him, in the treaty held at Veruins?
And many other beaueries, this way ayming,
But from some hope of inward ayd from hence?
And that, all this derectly aymes at you,
Your highnes hath by one intelligence,
Good cause to thinke; which is your late aduice,
That the Sea army, now prepard at Naples,
Hath an intended Enterprise on Prouence?
Although the cunning Spaniard giues it out,
That all is for Algier.
I must beleeue,
That without treason bred in our owne brests,
Spaines, affayres are not in so good estate,
To ayme at any action against France:
And if Byron should be their instrument,
His altred disposition could not growe
So far wide in an instant; Nor resigne,
His valure to these lawles resolutions
Vpon the sodaine; nor without some charms,
Of forreigne hopes and flatteries sung to him:
But far it flyes my thoughts, that such a spirrit,
So actiue, valiant, and vigilant;
Can see it selfe transformed with such wild furies.
And like a dreame it shewes to my conceipts,
That he who by himselfe hath wonne such honor:
And he to whome his father left so much,
He that still dayly reapes so much from me,
And knowes he may encrease it to more proofe
From me, then any other forreigne King;
Should quite against the streame of all religion,
Honor, and reason, take a course so foule,
And neither keepe his Oth, nor saue his Soule.
Can the poore keeping of a Citadell
Which I denyed, to be at his disposure,
Make him forgoe the whole strength of his honours?
It is impossible, though the violence,
Of his hot spirtit made him make attempt
Vpon our person for denying him;
Yet well I found his loyall iudgment seru'd,
To keepe it from effect: besides being offer'd,
Two hundred thousand crownes in yearely pention,
And to be Generall of all the forces
The Spaniards had in France; they found him still,
As an vnmatcht Achilles in the warres,
So a most wise Vlisses to their words,
Stopping his eares at their enchanted sounds;
And plaine he tould them that although his blood
(Being mou'd) by Nature, were a very fire
And boyld in apprehension of a wrong,
Yet should his mind hold such a scepter there,
As would containe it from all act and thought
Of treachery or ingratitude to his Prince.
Yet do I long, me thinkes, to see La Fin,
Who hath his heart in keeping; since his state,
(Growne to decay and he to discontent)
Comes neere the ambitious plight of Duke Byron,
My Lord Vidame, when does your Lordship thinke,
Your vnckle of La Fin will be arriu'd.
I thinke (my Lord) he now is neere ariuing
For his particular iourny and deuotion,
Vow'd to the holy Lady of Loretto,
Was long since past and he vpon returne.
In him, as in a christall that is charm'd,
I shall descerne by whome and what designes,
My rule is threatened; and that sacred power
That hath enabled this defensiue arme,
(When I enioyd but in an vnequall Nooke,
Of that I now possesse) to front a King
Farre my Superiour: And from twelue set battailes,
March home a victor: ten of them obtaind,
VVithout my personall seruice; will not see
A traitrous subiect foile me, and so end
VVhat his hand hath with such successe begunne.
See the yong Daulphin brought to cheere your highnes.
My royall blessing, and the King of heauen,
Make thee an aged, and a happie King:
Helpe, Nurse, to put my sword into his hand;
Hold Boy, by this; and with it may thy arme
Cut from thy tree of rule, all traitrous branches,
That striue to shadow and eclips thy glories;
Haue thy old fathers angell for thy guide,
Redoubled be his spirit in thy brest;
VVho when this State ranne like a turbulent sea,
In ciuill hates and bloudy enmity,
Their wrathes and enuies, like so many windes,
Setled and burst: and like the Halcions birth,
Be thine to bring a calme vpon the shore,
In which the eyes of warre may euer sleepe,
As ouermacht with former massacres,
VVhen guiltie [lust] made Noblesse, feed on Noblesse;
All the sweete plentie of the realme exhausted;
VVhen the nak't merchant, was pursude for spoile,
VVhen the pore Pezants frighted neediest theeues
VVith their pale leaneness; nothing left on them
But meager carcases sustaind with ayre,
Wandring like Ghosts affrighted from their graues,
VVhen with the often and incessant sounds
The very beasts knew the alarum bell,
And (hearing it) ranne bellowing to their home:
From which vnchristian broiles and homicides,
Let the religious sword of iustice free
Thee and thy kingdomes gouern'd after me.
O heauen! or if th'vnsettled bloud of France,
VVith ease, and wealth, renew her ciuill furies:
Let all my powers be emptied in my Sonne
To curb, and end them all, as I haue done.
Let him by vertue, quite out of from fortune,
Her fetherd shoulders, and her winged shooes,
And thrust from her light feete, her turning stone
That she may euer tarry by his throne.
And of his worth, let after ages say,
(He fighting for the land; and bringing home
Iust conquests, loden with his enimies spoiles)
His father past all France in martiall deeds,
But he, his father twenty times exceedes.
My deare friends D'Avuergne and Laffin,
We neede no conjurations to conceale:
Our close intendments, to aduance our states
Euen with our merits; which are now neglected;
Since Britaine is reduc't, and breathlesse warre
Hath sheath'd his sword, and wrapt his Ensignes vp;
The King hath now no more vse of my valure,
And therefore I shall now no more enioy
The credite that my seruice held with him;
My seruice that hath driuen through all extreames,
Through tempests, droughts, and through the deepest floods;
Winters of shot: and ouer rockes so high
That birds could scarce aspire their ridgy toppes;
The world is quite inuerted: vertue throwne
At Vices feete: and sensuall peace confounds,
Valure, and cowardise: Fame, and Infamy;
The rude and terrible age is turnd againe:
When the thicke ayre hid heauen, and all the starres,
Were drown'd in humor, tough, and hard to peirse,
When the red Sunne held not his fixed place;
Kept not his certaine course, his rise and set
Nor yet distinguisht with his definite boundes;
Nor in his firme conuersions, were discernd
The fruitfull distances of time and place,
In the well varyed seasons of the yeare;
When th'incomposd incursions of floods
Wasted and eat the earth; and all things shewed
Wilde and disordred: nought was worse then now;
Wee must reforme and haue a new creation
Of State and gouernment; and on our Chaos
Will I sit brooding vp another world.
I who through all the dangers that can siege
The life of man, haue forcst my glorious way
To the repayring of my countries ruines,
Will ruine it againe, to re-aduance it;
Romaine Camyllus, safte the State of Rome
With farre lesse merite, then Byron hath France;
And how short of this is my recompence.
The king shall know, I will haue better price
Set on my seruices; in spight of whome
I will proclaime and ring my discontents
Into the farthest eare of all the world.
How great a spirit he breaths? how learnd? how wise?
But (worthy Prince) you must giue temperate ayre,
To your vnmatcht, and more then humaine winde;
Else will our plots be frost-bit, in the flowre.
Betwixt our selues we may giue liberall vent
To all our fiery and displeas'd impressions;
Which nature could not entertaine with life,
Without some exhalation; A wrongd thought
Will breake a rib of steele.
My Princely friend,
Enough of these eruptions; our graue Councellor
Well knowes that great affaires will not be forg'd
But vpon Anuills that are linde with wooll;
We must ascend to our intentions toppe
Like Clowdes that be not seene till they be vp!
O, you do too much rauish; And my soule
Offer to Musique in your numerous breath;
Sententious, and so high, it wakens death;
It is for these parts, that the Spanish King
Hath sworne to winne them to his side
At any price or perril; That great Sauoy,
Offers his princely daughter, and a dowry,
Amounting to fiue hundred thousand crownes;
With full transport of all the Soueraigne rights
Belonging to the State of Burgondie;
Which marriage will be made, the onely Cyment
T'effect and strengthen all our secret Treaties;
Instruct me thererfore, (my assured Prince)
Now I am going to resolue the King
Of his suspitions, how I shall behaue me.
Go my most trusted friend, with happy feete:
Make me a sound man with him; Go to Court
But with a little traine; and be prepar'd
To heare, at first, tearmes of contempt and choller,
Which you may easily calme, and turne to grace.
If you beseech his highnesse to beleeue
That your whole drift and course for Italy,
(Where he hath heard you were) was onely made
Out of your long-well-knowne deuotion
To our right holy Lady of Lorretto,
As you haue told some of your friends in Court:
And that in passing Mylan and Thurin,
They charg'd you to propound my marrriage
With the third daughter of the Duke of Sauoy;
Which you haue done, and I reiected it,
Resolu'd to build vpon his royall care
For my bestowing, which he lately vowd.
O, you direct, as if the God of light
Sat in each nooke of you; and pointed out
The path of Empire; Charming all the dangers
On both sides arm'd, with his harmoniouse finger.
Besides let me intreat you to dismisse,
All that haue made the voyage with your Lordship,
But specially the Curate: And to locke
Your papers in some place of doubtlesse safety;
Or sacrifize them to the God of fire;
Considering worthily that in your handes
I put my fortunes, honour, and my life.
Therein the bounty that your Grace hath showne me,
I prize past life, and all thinges that are mine;
And will vndoubtedly preserue, and tender
The merit of it, as my hope of heauen.
I make no question; farewell worthy friend.
Are these proofes of that purely Chatholike zeale
That made him wish no other glorious title,
Then to be calld the scourge of Huguenots?
No question sir he was of no religion;
But (vpon false groundes, by some Courtiers laid)
Hath oft bene heard to mocke and iest at all.
Are not his treasons haynous?
—Most abhord;
All is confirmd that you haue heard before,
And amplified with many horrors more.
Good De'Laffin; you were our golden plummet,
To sound this gulphe of all ingratitude;
In which you haue with excellent desert
Of loyalty and pollicie, exprest
Your name in action; and with such apparence
Haue prou'd the parts of his ingratefull treasons,
That I must credit, more then I desir'd,
I must confesse my Lord, my voyages
Made to the Duke of Sauoy and to Mylan;
Were with indeauour, that the warres returnd,
Might breed some trouble to your Maiestie;
And profit those by whome they were procur'd;
But since, in their disseignes, your sacred person
Was not excepted (which I since haue seene)
It so abhord me, that I was resolu'd
To giue you full intelligence thereof;
And rather chus'd to fayle in promises,
Made to the seruant; then infringe my fealty
Sworne to my royall Soueraigne and Maister;
I am extreamely discontent to see,
This most vnaturall conspiracie;
And would not haue the Marshall of Byron,
The first example or my forced Iustice;
Nor that his death should be the worthy cause,
That my calme raigne, (which hetherto hath held
A cleare and cheerefull skie aboue the heads
Of my deare subiects) should so sodainely
Be ouercast with clowdes of fire, and thunder;
Yet on submission, I vow stil his pardon.
And still our humble counsayles, (for his seruice)
Would so resolue you, if he will imploy
His honourd valure as effectually,
To fortifie the State, against your foes;
As he hath practis'd bad intendments with them.
That vow shall stand; and we will now addresse,
Some messengers to call him home to Court;
VVithout the slendrest intimation,
Of any ill we know; we will restraine
(Vvith all forgiuenes, if he will confesse)
His headlong course to ruine; and his taste,
From the sweete poyson of his friendlike foes:
Treason hath blisterd heeles, dishonest Thinges
Haue bitter Riuers, though delicious Springs;
Descures haste you vnto him, and informe,
That hauing heard by sure intelligence,
Of the great leuies made in Italie,
Of Arms and soldiers; I am resolute,
Vpon my frontiers to maintaine an Army;
The charge whereof I will impose on him;
And to that end, expresly haue commanded,
De Vic, our Lord Ambassador in Suisse,
To demand leuie of six thousand men:
Appointing them to march where Duke Byron
Shall haue directions; wherein I haue follow'd.
The counsaile of my Constable his Gossip;
Whose lik'd aduice, I made him him know by letters,
Wishing to heare his owne; from his owne mouth,
And by all meanes coniure, his speediest presence;
Do this with vtmost hast.
I will my Lord.
My good Lord Chancellor, of many Peeces,
More then is here, of his conspiracies
Presented to vs, by our friend, Laffin;
You, onely, shall reserue these seauen and twenty,
VVhich are not those that must conclude against him;
But mention only him: since I am loth,
To haue the rest of the conspirators, knowne.
My Lord, my purpose is to guard all these,
So safely from the sight of any other:
That in my doublet I will haue them sow'd;
Without discouering them to mine owne eies,
Till neede, or opportunitie requires.
You shall do well my Lord, they are of weight;
But I am doubtfull; that his conscience
Will make him so suspitious of the worst,
That he will hardly be induc't to come.
I much should doubt that to, but that I hope
The strength of his conspiracie, as yet
Is not so readie, that he dare presume,
By his refusall to make knowne so much
Of his disloialtie.
I yet conceiue;
His practises are turnd to no bad end,
And good Laffin, I pray you wright to him,
To hasten his repaire: and make him sure,
That you haue satisfied me to the full.
For all his actions, and haue vtterd nought,
But what might serue to banish bad impressions.
I will not faile my Lord.
Convey your letters;
By some choice friend of his: or by his brother:
And for a third excitement to his presence;
Ianin, your selfe shall goe, and with the powre
That both the rest employ to make him come,
Vse you the strength of your perswasions.
I will my Lord, and hope I shall present him.
Wilt please your Maiestie to take your place,
The Maske is comming.
Roome my Lords, stand close.
My Lord, these Nimphs, part of the scatterd traine,
Of friendlesse Vertue (liuing in the woods
Of shady Arden: and of late not hearing
The dreadfull sounds of Warre; but that sweete Peace,
Was by your valure lifted from her graue,
Set on your royall right hand: and all Virtues
Summond with honor, and with rich rewards,
To be her hand-maides): These I say, the Vertues,
Haue put their heads out of their Caues and Couerts,
To be her true attendants in your Court:
In which desire, I must relate a tale,
Of kinde and worthy emulation,
Twixt these two Vertues, leaders of the traine.
This on the right hand is Sophrosyne,
Or Chastitie: this other Dapsyle
Or Liberalitie: their emulation
Begat a iarre, which thus was reconcil'd.
I, (hauing left my Goddesse mothers lap,
To hawlke, and shoote at Birds in Arden groues,)
Beheld this Princely Nimph with much affection,
Left killing Birds, and turn'd into a Birde,
Like which I flew betwixt her Ivory brests,
As if I had beene driuen by some Hawlke,
To sue to her for saftety of my life;
She smilde at first, and sweetly shadowd me,
With soft protection of her siluer hand;
Some-times she tyed my legges in her rich hayre,
And made me (past my nature, libertie)
Proud of my fetters: As I pertly sat,
On the white pillowes of her naked brests,
I sung for ioy; she answered note for note,
Relish for relish, with such ease and Arte,
In her diuine diuision, that my tunes,
Showd like the God of Shepheards to the Sunnes,
Comparde with hers: ashamd of which disgrace,
I tooke my true shape, Bowe, and all my shafts,
And lighted all my torches at her eyes,
Which (set about her, in a golden ring)
I followd Birds againe, from Tree to Tree,
Kild, and presented, and she kindely tooke.
But when she handled my triumphant Bowe,
And saw the beauty of my golden shafts,
She begd them of me; I, poore boy replyed,
I had no other Riches; yet was pleasde
To hazard all, and stake them gainst a kisse,
At an old game I vsde, call'd Penny-prick.
She, priuie to her owne skill in the play,
Answerd my challenge, so, I lost my armes:
And now my Shafts are headed with her lookes,
One of which Shafts she put into my Bowe,
And shot at this faire Nimph, with whom before
I tolde your Maiestie, she had some iarre.
The Nimph did instantly repent all parts
She playd in vrging that effeminate warre,
Lou'd and submitted; which submission
This tooke so well, that now they both are one:
And as for your deare loue, their discords grew,
So for your loue, they did their loues renew.
And now to prooue them capable of your court
In skill of such conceipts, and quallities
As here are practisde; they will first submit
Their grace in dancing to your highnesse doome,
And pray the prease to giue their meisures roome,
If this suffice, for one Court complement,
To make them gratious, and entertainde;
Behold another parcell of their Court-ship,
Which is a rare dexteritie in riddles,
Showne in one instance, which is here inscrib'd.
Here is a Riddle, which if any Knight
At first fight can resolue; he shall enioy
This Iewell here annext; which though it show
To vulgar eyes, no richer then a Peble;
And that no Lapydarie, nor great man
Will giue a Soulz for it; 'tis worth a kingdome:
For 'tis an artificiall stone composde,
By their great Mistresse, Vertue: and will make
Him that shall weare it, liue with any little,
Suffizde, and more content then any king.
If he that vndertakes cannot resolue it;
And that these Nimphs can haue no harbor here;
(It being considered, that so many Vertues
Can neuer liue in Court) he shall resolue
To leaue the Court, and liue with them in Arden,
Pronounce the riddle: I will vndertake it.
'Tis this sir.
What's that a faire Lady, most of all likes,
Yet euer makes shew she least of all seekes?
That's euer embrac'd and affected by her,
Yet neuer is seene to please or come nigh her:
Most seru'd in her night-weeds: does her good in a corner,
But a poore mans thing, yet doth richly adorne her:
Most cheape, and most deare, aboue all worldly pelfe,
That is hard to get in, but comes out of it selfe.
Let me peruse it, Cupid.
Here it is.
Your Riddle is good Fame.
Good fame? how make you that good?
Good fame is that a good Lady most likes I am sure;
Thats graunted;
Yet euer makes showe she least of all seekes: 
for shee likes it onely for the vertue, which is not glorious.
That holds well
Tis euer embrac't and affected by her: for she must, perseuer in vertue or fame 
vanishes. Yet neuer is seene to please or come nye her for fame is Inuisible,
Exceeding right.
Most serued in her night weeds: for Ladies that most weare their 
Nightweeds come left abrode, and they that come least abrode serue fame 
most; according to this; Non forma sed fama in publicum exire de bet.
Tis very substantiall,
Does her good in a corner: that is in her most retreate from the world, 
comforts her; but a poore mans thing: for euery poore man 
may purchase it, yet doth richly adorne a Lady.
That all must grant.
Most cheape for it costs nothing, and most deare, for gould can not buy it; 
aboue all worldly pelffe; for thats transitory, and fame eternall. 
It is hard to get in; that is hard to get: But comes out of it selfe; 
for when it is vertuosely deserud with the most inward retreate from 
the world, it comes out in spight of it, & so Cupid your iewell is mine.
It is: and be the vertue of it, yours.
Wee'l now turne to our daunce, and then attend,
Your heighnes will, as touching our resort,
If vertue may be entertaind in Court,
This show hath pleased me well, for that it figures.
The reconcilement of my Queene and Mistris:
Come Let vs in and thanke them and prepare,
To entertaine our trusty friend Byron.
Deare friend, we must not be more true to kings,
Then Kings are to their subiects, there are schooles,
Now broken ope in all parts of the world,
First founded in ingenious Italy,
Where some conclusions of estate are held,
That for a day preserue a Prince, and euer,
Destroy him after: from thence men are taught,
To glyde into degrees of height by crafte,
And then lock in them-selues by villanie:
But God, who knowes kings are not made by art,
But right of Nature, nor by trechery propt,
But simple vertue, once let fall from heauen,
A branch of that greene tree, whose root is yet
Fast fixt aboue the starrs: which sacred branch,
Wee well may liken to that Lawrell spray,
That from the heauenly Eagles golden seres,
Fell in the lap of great Augustus wife:
Which spray once set, grew vp into a tree,
Whereof were Girlonds made, and Emperors,
Had their estates and foreheads crownd with them:
And as the armes of that tree did decay,
The race of great Augustus wore away,
Nero being last of that imperiall line,
The tree and Emperor together died.
Religion is a branch, first set and blest
By heauens highe finger in the hearts of kings,
Which wholesome grew into a goodly tree,
Bright Angels sat and sung vpon the twigs,
And royall branches for the heads of Kings,
Were twisted of them but since squint-ey'd enuye:
And pale suspicion, dasht the heads of kingdomes,
One gainst another: two abhorred twins,
With two foule tayles: sterne Warre and Libertie,
Entred the world. The tree that grew from heauen.
Is ouerrunne with mosse; the cheerfull musique,
That heeretofore hath sounded out of it,
Beginnes to cease; and as she casts her leaues,
(By small degrees) the kingdomes of the earth
Decline and wither: and looke whensoeuer
That the pure sap in her, is dried vp quite;
The lamp of all authoritie goes out,
And all the blaze of Princes is extinkt;
Thus as the Poet sends a messenger
Out to the stage, to shew the summe of all,
That followes after: so are Kings reuolts,
And playing both waies with religion,
Fore-runners of afflictions imminent,
Which (like a Chorus) subiects must lament.
My Lord I stand not on these deepe discourses,
To settle my course to your fortunes; mine
Are freely and inseperablie linckt:
And to your loue my life.
Thankes Princely friend,
And whatsoeuer good shall come of me,
Pursu'd by al the Catholike Princes aydes
With whom I ioyne, and whose whole states proposde,
To winne my valure, promise me a throne:
All shall be equall with my selfe; thine owne.
My Lord here is D'escuris sent from the King,
Desires accesse to you.
Attend him in.
Helth to my Lord the Duke:
Welcome D'escuris,
In what helth rests our royall Soueraigne.
In good helth of his bodie, but his minde,
Is something troubled with the gathering stormes,
Of forreigne powres; that as he is inform'd
Addresse themselues into his frontier townes;
And therefore his intent, is to maintaine:
The body of an armie on those parts;
And yeeld their worthie conduct to your valure.
From whence heares he that any stormes are rising?
From Italy; and his intelligence,
No doubt is certaine, that in all those partes
Leuies are hotly made; for which respect,
He sent to his Ambassador De Vic,
To make demand in Switzerland, for the raising
With vtmost dilligence of sixe thousand men;
All which shall bee commanded to attend,
On your direction; as the Constable
Your honord Gossip gaue him in aduice;
And hee sent you by wrighting: of which letters,
He would haue answere, and aduice from you
By your most speedie presence.
This is strange,
That when the enimie is t'attempt his frontiers,
He calls me from the frontiers; does he thinke,
It is an action worthie of my valure
To turne my back, to an approching foe?
The foe is not so nere, but you may come,
And take more strickt directions from his highnesse,
Then he thinkes fit his letters should containe,
Without the least attainture of your valure;
And therefore good my Lord, forbeare excuse
And beare your selfe on his direction;
Who well you know hath neuer made designe
For your most worthy seruice, where he saw
That any thing but honour could succede.
I will not come I sweare:
I know your grace,
Will send no such vnsauorie replie.
Tell him that I besecch his Maiesty,
To pardon my repaire till th'end be knowne
Of all these leuies now in Italie.
My Lord I know that tale will neuer please him;
And wish you as you loue his loue and pleasure,
To satisfie his summons speedily:
And speedily I know he will returne you;
By heauen it is not fit: if all my seruice
Makes me know any thing: beseech him therefore,
To trust my iudgement in these doubtfull charges,
Since in assur'd assaults it hath not faild him.
I would your Lordship now, would trust his iudgement.
Gods precious, y'are importunate past measure,
And (I know) further, then your charge extends,
Ile satisfie his highnesse, let that serue;
For by this flesh and bloud, you shall not beare,
Any replie to him, but this from me.
Tis nought to me my Lord, I wish your good,
And for that cause haue beene importunate.
By no meanes goe my Lord; but with distrust,
Of all that hath beene said or can be sent;
Collect your friends, and stand vpon your gard,
The Kings faire letters, and his messages
Are onely Golden Pills, and comprehend
Horrible purgatiues.
I will not goe,
For now I see th'instructions lately sent me,
That something is discouerd, are too true,
And my head rules none of those neighbor Nobles,
That euery Pursuivant brings beneath the axe:
If they bring me out, they shall see ile hatch
Like to the Black-thorne, that puts forth his leafe,
Not with the golden fawnings of the Sunne,
But sharpest showers of haile, and blackest frosts:
Blowes, batteries, breaches, showers of steele and bloud,
Must be his doun-right messengers for me,
And not the misling breath of policie:
He, he himselfe, made passage to his Crowne
Through no more armies, battailes, massacres,
Then I will aske him to arriue at me;
He takes on him, my executions,
And on the demolitions, that this arme,
Hath shaken out of forts and Citadells,
Hath he aduanc't the Tropheys of his valor;
Where I, in those assumptions may skorne,
And speake contemptuously of all the world,
For any equal yet, I euer found;
And in my rising, not the Syrian Starre
That in the Lyons mouth, vndaunted shines,
And makes his braue ascension with the Sunne,
Was of th' Egiptians, with more zeale beheld,
And made a rule to know the circuit
And compasse of the yeare; then I was held
When I appeard from battaile; the whole sphere,
And full sustainer of the state we beare;
I haue Alcides-like gone vnder th' earth
And on these showlders borne the weight of France:
And (for the fortunes of the thankles King)
My father (all know) set him in his throne,
And if he vrge me, I may pluck him out.
Here is the president Ianin, my Lord;
Sent from the King, and vrgeth quick accesse.
Another Pursiuant? and one so quick?
He takes next course with me, to make him stay:
But, let him in, let's here what he importunes.
Honor, and loyall hopes to Duke Byron.
No other tooch me: say how fares the King?
Farely my Lord; the cloud is yet farre off
That aimes at his obscuring, and his will,
Would gladly giue the motion to your powers
That should disperse it; but the meanes, himselfe,
Would personally relate in your direction.
Still on that haunt?
Vpon my life, my Lord,
He much desires to see you, and your sight
Is now growne necessarie to suppresse
(As with the glorious splendor of the Sunne)
The rude windes that report breaths in his eares,
Endeuoring to blast your loialtie.
Sir, if my loyaltie, stick in him no faster
But that the light breath of report may loose it,
(So I rest still vnmoou'd) let him be shaken.
But these aloofe abodes, my Lord bewray,
That there is rather firmnesse in your breath.
Then in your heart; Truth is not made of glasse,
That with a small touch, it should feare to breake,
And therefore should not shunne it; beleeue me
His arme is long, and strong; and it can fetch
Any within his will, that will not come:
Not he that surfeits in his mines of gold,
And for the pride thereof, compares with God,
Calling (with almost nothing different)
His powers inuincible, for omnipotent,
Can back your boldest Fort gainst his assaults;
It is his pride, and vaine ambition,
That hath but two staires in his high designes;
(The lowest enuie, and the highest bloud)
That doth abuse you; and giues mindes too high,
Rather a will by guiddinesse to fall,
Then to descend by iudgement.
I relye
On no mans back nor belly; but the King
Must thinke that merit, by ingratitude crackt,
Requires a firmer sementing then words.
And he shall finde it a much harder worke
To soder broken hearts then shiuerd glasses.
My Lord, 'tis better hold a Soueraignes loue
By bearing iniuries; then by laying out
Stirre his displeasure; Princes discontents
(Being once incenst) are like the flames of Aetna,
Not to be quencht, nor lessend: and be sure,
A subiects confidence in any merit,
Against his Soueraigne, that makes him presume
To flie too high; approoues him like a clowd,
That makes a show as it did hawlke at kingdomes,
And could command, all raisd beneath his vapor:
When sodainly, the Fowle that hawlkt so faire,
Stoopes in a puddle, or consumes in ayre.
I flie with no such ayme, nor am opposde,
Against my Soueraigne; but the worthy height
I haue wrought by my seruice, I will hold,
Which if I come away, I cannot do;
For if the enimie should inuade the Frontier,
Whose charge to guard, is mine, with any spoile,
(Although the King in placing of another
Might well excuse me) Yet all forraine Kinges
That can take note of no such secret quittance,
Will lay the weakenesse here, vpon my wants;
And therefore my abode is resolute.
I sorrow for your resolution,
And feare your dissolution, will succeed.
I must indure it;
Fare you well my Lord;
Farewell to you;
Captaine what other newes?
La Fin salutes you;
Welcome good friend; I hope your wisht arriuall
Will giue some certaine end to our disseignes;
I know not that, my Lord; reports are rais'd so doubtfull and so different, 
that the truth of any one can hardly be assur'd.
Good newes, D'Avuergne; our trusty friend La Fin,
Hath clear'd all scruple with his Maiestie,
And vtterd nothing but what seru'd to cleare
All bad Suggestions.
So he sayes, my Lord
But others say, La Fins assurances
Are meere deceipts; and wish you to beleeue;
That when the Vidame, nephew to La Fin,
Met you at Autune, to assure your doubts,
His vncle had said nothing to the King
That might offend you; all the iournies charge,
The King defrayed; besides, your truest friendes
Willd me to make you certaine that your place
Of gouernment is otherwise dispos'd;
And all aduise you, for your latest hope,
To make retreat into the Franch County.
I thanke them all, but they touch not the depth,
Of the affaires, betwixt La Fin and me.
Who is returnd contented to his house,
Quite freed, of all displeasure or distrust;
And therefore, worthy friends wele now to Court.
My Lord, I like your other friends aduices,
Much better then Laffins; and on my life
You can not come to Court with any saftie.
Who shall infringe it? I know, all the Court,
Haue better apprehension of my valure;
Then that they dare lay violent hands on mee;
If I haue onely meanes to drawe this sword,
I shall haue powre enough to set me free,
From seasure, by my proudest enemie.
He will not come I dare engage my hand.
He will be fetcht then, ile engage my head.
Come, or be fetcht, he quite hath lost his honor,
In giuing these suspicions of reuolt
From his allegiance: that which he hath wunne,
With sundry wounds, and perrill of his life;
With wonder of his wisdome, and his valure,
He looseth with a most enchanted glorie:
And admiration of his pride, and folly.
Why did you neuer see a fortunate man,
Sodainely rais'd to heapes of welth and honor?
Nor any rarely great in guifts of nature,
As valure, wit, and smooth vse of the tongue,
Set strangely to the pitch of populare likings?
But with as sodaine falls the rich and honord,
Were ouerwhelmd by pouertie and shame
Or had no vse of both aboue the wretched.
Men neuer are satisfi'd with that they haue;
But as a man, matcht with a louely wife,
When his most heauenly Theorye of her beauties,
Is duld and quite exhausted with his practise:
He brings her forth to feasts, where he ahlas,
Falls to his viends with no thought like others,
That thinke him blest in her, and they (poore men)
Court, and make faces, offer seruice, sweate,
With their desires contention, breake their braines
For iests, and tales: sit mute, and loose their lookes,
(Far out of wit, and out of countenance)
So all men else, do what they haue transplant,
And place their welth in thirst of that they want.
He will not come; I must both grieue and wonder,
That all my care to winne my subiects loue
And in one cup of friendship to comix,
Our liues and fortunes: should leaue out so many
As giue a man (comtemptuous of my loue,
And of his owne good, in the Kingdomes Peace)
Hope, in a continuance so vngratefull,
To beare out his designes in spight of me;
How should I better please all, then I do?
When they suppos'd, I would haue giuen some
Insolent garisons; others Citadells,
And to all sorts, encrease of miseries;
Prouince by Prouince, I did visit all
Whom those iniurious rumors had diswaide;
And shew'd them how, I neuer sought to build,
More forts for me, then were within their hearts;
Nor vse more sterne constraints then their good wills,
To succor the necessities of my crowne,
That I desird to ad to their contents
By all occasions, rather then subtract;
Nor wisht I, that my treasury should flow,
With gold that swum in, in my subiects teares;
And then I found no man, that did not blesse,
My few yeares raigne, and their triumphant peace,
And do they now so soone, complaine of ease?
He will not come?
O madnesse? he is come.
The duke is come my Lord:
Oh Sir, yare welcome,
And fitly, to conduct me to my house;
I must beseech your Maiesties excuse,
That (Ielouse of mine honor) I haue vsd
Some of mine owne commandment in my stay,
And came not with your heighnesse soonest summons.
The faithfu'l seruant right in holy writ;
That said he would not come and yet he came:
But come you hether; I must tell you now,
Not the contempt you stood to in your stay,
But the bad ground that bore vp your contempt,
Makes you arriue at no port, but repentance,
Despayre, and ruine;
Be what port it will,
At which your will, will make me be ariued,
I am not come to iustifie my selfe,
To aske you pardon nor accuse my friends,
If you conceale my enemies you are one,
And then my pardon shall be worth your asking,
Or else your head be worth my cutting of.
Being friend and worthy fautor of my selfe,
I am no foe of yours, nor no empayrer,
Since he can no way worthely maintaine
His Princes honor that neglects his owne:
And if your will haue beene to my true reason,
(Maintaining still the truth of loyalty)
A checke to my free nature and mine honor,
And that on your free iustice I presum'd
To crosse your will a little, I conceine,
You will not thinke this forfaite worth my head;
Haue you maintaind your truth of loyalty?
When since I pardoned foule ententions,
Resoluing to forget eternally, What they apperd in,
And had welcomd you as the kind father doth his riotous son.
I can approue facts fowler then th' intents,
Of deepe disloyalty and highest treason;
May this right hand be thunder to my brest,
If I stand guilty of the slendrest fact,
Wherein the left of those two can be prooued,
For could my tender conscience but haue toucht,
At any such vnnaturall relaps;
I would not with this confidence haue runne,
Thus headlong in the furnace of a wrath,
Blowne, and thrice kindled: hauing way enough,
In my election both to shunne and sleight it.
Y'are grosely and vain gloriously abus'd,
There is no way in Sauoy nor in Spaine,
To giue a foole that hope of your escape,
And had you not (euen when you did) arriued,
(With horror to the proudest hope you had)
I would haue fetcht you.
You must then haue vs'd
A power beyond my knowledge, and a will,
Beyond your iustice. For a little stay
More then I vsd would hardly haue beene worthy,
Of such an open expedition;
In which to all the censures of the world,
My faith and Innocence had beene fouly foyld;
Which (I protest) by heauens bright wittnesses
That shine farr, farr, from mixture with our feares,
Retaine as perfect roundnes as their spheares;
Tis well my Lord, I thought I could haue frighted
Your firmest confidence: some other time,
We will (as now in priuate) sift your actions.
And poure more then you thinke into the sieve,
Alwaies reseruing clemency and pardon
Vpon confession, be you nere so foule,
Come lets cleere vp our browes shall we to tennis.
I my Lord if I may make the match.
The Duke Espernon and my selfe will play,
With you and Count Soissons;
I know my Lord.
You play well but you make your matches ill.
Come tis a match.
How like you my ariuall?
Ile tell you as your friend in your eare.
You haue giuen more preferment to your courage,
Then to the prouident counsailes of your friends.
I told him so my Lord, and much was grieu'd
To see his bold approach, so full of will.
Well I must beare it now, though but with th'head,
The shoulders bearing nothing.
By Saint Iohn,
Tis a good headlesse resolution.
O the most base fruites of a setled peace!
In men, I meane; worse then their durty fields,
Which they manure much better them-selues:
For them they plant, and sowe, and ere they grow,
Weedie, and choakt with thornes, they grub and proyne,
And make them better, then when cruell warre,
Frighted from thence the sweaty labourer:
But men them-selues, in steed of bearing fruites,
Growe rude, and foggie, ouer-growne with weedes,
Their spirits, and freedomes smootherd in their ease;
And as their tyrants and their ministers,
Growe wilde in prosecution of their lusts,
So they grow prostitute, and lye (like whores)
Downe and take vp, to their abhord dishonors:
The friendlesse may be iniur'd and opprest;
The guiltlesse lead to slaughter, the deseruer
Giuen to the begger; right be wholy wrongd,
And wrong be onely honor'd; till the strings
Of euery mans heart, crack; and who will stirre,
To tell authority, that it doth erre.
All men cling to it, though they see their blouds
In their most deare associates and Allyes,
Pour'd into kennels by it: and who dares
But looke well in the breast, whom that impayres?
How all the Court now lookes askew on me?
Go by without saluting, shun my sight,
Which (like a march sunne) agues breeds in them,
From whence of late, 'twas health to haue a beame.
Now none will speake to vs, we thrust our selues
Into mens companies, and offer speech,
As if not made, for their diuerted eares,
Their backs turnd to vs, and their words to others,
And we must like obsequious Parasites,
Follow their faces, winde about their persons,
For lookes and answers: or be cast behinde,
No more viewd then the wallet of their faults.
Yet here's one views me, and I thinke will speake.
My Lord, if you respect your name and race,
The preseruation of your former honors,
Merites and vertues; humbly cast them all,
At the kings mercy; for beyond all doubt,
Your acts haue thether driuen them: he hath proofes
So pregnant, and so horride, that to heare them,
Would make your valure in your very lookes,
Giue vp your forces, miserably guilty:
But he is most loth (for his ancient loue
To your rare vertues: and in their empaire,
The full discouragement of all that liue,
To trust or fauour any gifts in Nature)
T'expose them to the light; when darknesse may
Couer her owne broode, and keepe still in day,
Nothing of you but that may brooke her brightnesse:
You know what horrors these high strokes do bring,
Raisd in the arme of an incensed King.
My Lord, be sure the King cannot complaine
Of any thing in me, but my true seruice,
Which in so many dangers of my death,
May so approoue my spotlesse loyaltie;
That those quite opposite horrors you assure,
Must looke out of his owne ingratitude;
Or the malignant enuies of my foes,
Who powre me out in such a Stygian flood,
To drowne me in my selfe, since their deserts
Are farre from such a deluge; and in me
Hid like so many riuers in the Sea.
You thinke I come to sound you; fare you wel,
See see, not one of them will cast a glaunce
At our eclipsed faces;
They keepe all to cast in admiration on the King:
For from his face are all their faces moulded.
But when a change comes; we shall see them all
Chang'd into water, that will instantly
Giue looke for looke, as if it watcht to greete vs;
Or else for one, they'l giue vs twenty faces,
Like to the little specks on sides of glasses;
Is't not an easie losse to lose theyr lookes,
Whose hearts so soone are melted?
But me thinks,
(Being Courtiers) they should cast best looks on men,
When they thought worst of them.
O no my Lord,
They n'ere dissemble but for some aduantage;
They sell theyr looks, and shadowes; which they rate
After theyr markets, kept beneath the State;
Lord what foule weather theyr aspects do threaten?
See in how graue a Brake he sets his vizard:
Passion of nothing; See, an excellent Iesture:
Now Courtship goes a ditching in theyr fore-heads;
And we are falne into those dismall ditches;
Why euen thus dreadfully would they be rapt,
If the Kings butterd egges, were onely spilt.
Lord Chancellor;
I my Lord;
And lord Vidame:
And not Byron? here's a prodigious change;
He cast no Beame on you;
Why now you see
From whence theyr countenances were copyed.
See, here comes some newes, I beleeue my Lord.
VVhat saies the honest captaine of my guard?
I bring a letter from a friend of yours.
Tis welcome then:
Haue we yet any friends?
More then yee would I thinke: I neuer saw,
Men in their right mindes so vnrighteous
In their owne causes.
See what thou hast brought,
Hee wills vs to retire our selues my Lord,
And makes as if it were almost too late,
What saies my captaine; shall we goe or no?
I would your daggers point had kist my heart,
When you resolu'd to come.
I pray the why?
Yet doth that sencelesse Apopelxy dull you?
The diuell or your wicked angell blinds you,
Bereauing all your reason of a man
And leaues you but the spirit of a horse,
In your brute nostrills: onely powre to dare.
VVhy, dost thou think, my comming here hath brought me
To such an vnrecouerable danger?
Iudge by the strange Ostents that haue succeeded,
Since your arriuall: the kinde fowle, the wilde duck,
That came into your cabinet, so beyond
The sight of all your seruants, or your selfe:
That flew about, and on your shoulder sat
And which you had so fed, and so attended;
For that dum loue she shew'd you; iust as soone,
As you were parted, on the sodaine died.
And to make this no lesse then an Oftent;
Another that hath fortun'd since, confirmes it:
Your goodly horse Pastrana, which the Archduke,
Gaue you at Bruxells; in the very houre,
You left your strength, fel-mad, and kild himselfe;
the like chanc't to the horse the great duke sent you:
and, with both these, the horse the duke of Lorraine,
Sent you at, Vinsie made a third presage,
Of some Ineuitable fate that toucht you,
Who like the other pin'd away and died,
All these together are indeed ostentfull,
Which by another like, I can confirme:
The matchlesse Earle of Essex who some make,
(In their most sure diuinings of my death)
A parallel with me in life and fortune,
Had one horse like-wise that the very howre,
He sufferd death, (being well the night before)
Died in his pasture. Noble happy beasts,
That die, not hauing to their wills to liue:
They vse no deprecations, nor complaints.
Nor sute for mercy: amongst them the Lion,
Serues not the Lion; nor the horse the horse,
As man serues man: when men shew most their spirrits,
In valure and their vtmost dares to do;
They are compard to Lions, Woolues, and Bores,
But by conuersion; None will say a Lyon,
Fights as he had the Spirrit of a man.
Let me then in my danger now giue cause,
For all men to begin that Simile.
For all my huge engagement, I prouide me,
This short sword onely; which if I haue time,
To show my apprehendor, he shall vse,
Power of tenne Lions if I get not loose.
What shall we doe with this vnthankefull man?
Would he (of one thing) but reueale the truth,
Which I haue proofe of, vnderneath his hand,
He should not tast my Iustice. I would giue,
Two hundred thousand crownes, that he would yeeld,
But such meanes for my pardon, as he should;
I neuer lou'd man like him: would haue trusted,
My Sonne in his protection, and my Realme:
He hath deseru'd my loue with worthy seruice,
Yet can he not deny, but I haue thrice,
Sau'd him from death: I drew him of the foe.
At Fountaine Francoise where he was engag'd,
So wounded and so much amazd with blowes,
That (as I playd the souldier in his rescue,)
I was enforc't to play the Marshall,
To order the retreat: because he said,
He was not fit to do it nor to serue me,
Your maiesty hath vsd your vtmost meanes,
Both by your owne perswasions, and his friends
To bring him to submission, and confesse
(With some signe of repentance) his foule fault:
Yet still he stands prefract and insolent.
You haue in loue and care of his recouery
Beene halfe in labour to produce a course,
And resolution, what were fit for him.
And since so amply it concernes your crown,
You must by law cut of, what by your grace,
You cannot bring into the state of safety.
Begin at th' end my Lord and execute,
Like Alexander with Parmenio.
Princes (you knowe) are Maisters of their lawes,
And may resolue them to what forms they please,
So all conclude in iustice; in whose stroke,
There is one sort of manadge for the Great;
Another for inferiour: The great Mother,
Of all productions (graue Necessity)
Commands the variation: And the profit,
So certenly fore-seene, commends the example.
I like not executions so informall,
For which my predecessors haue beene blam'd:
My Subiects and the world shall knowe my powre
And my authority by lawes vsuall course
Dares punish; not the deuilish heads of treason,
But there confederates be they nere so dreadfull.
The decent ceremonies of my lawes,
And their solemnities shall be obserued,
With all their Sterenes and Seueritie.
Where will your highnes haue him apprehended?
Not in the Castle (as some haue aduis'd)
But in his chamber;
Rather in your owne,
Or comming out of it; for tis assur'd
That any other place of apprehension,
Will make the hard performance, end in blood.
To shun this likely-hood, my Lord tis best
To make the apprehension neere your chamber;
For all respect and reuerence giuen the place,
More then is needfull to chastice the person,
And saue the opening of too many veines;
Is vain and dangerous.
Gather you your guard,
And I will finde fit time to giue the word,
When you shall seaze on him and on D'Avuergne;
Wee will be readie to the death; (my Lord)
O thou that gouernst the keene swords of Kings,
Direct my arme in this important stroke,
Or hold it being aduanc't; the weight of blood,
Euen in the basest subiect, doth exact
Deepe consultation, in the highest King;
For in one subiect, deaths vniust affrights,
Passions, and paines, (though he be n'ere so poore)
Aske more remorse, then the voluptuous spleenes
Of all Kings in the world, deserue respect;
Hee should be borne grey-headed that will beare
The sword of Empire; Iudgement of the life,
Free state, and reputation of a man,
(If it be iust and worthy) dwells so darke
That it denies accesse to Sunne and Moone;
The soules eye sharpned with that sacred light,
Of whome the Sunne it selfe is but a beame,
Must onely giue that iudgement; O how much
Erre those Kings then, that play with life and death,
And nothing put into their serious States,
But humor and their lusts! For which alone
Men long for kingdomes; whose huge counterpoise
In cares and dangers, could a foole comprise,
He would not be a King but would be wise;
Heere comes the man, with whose ambitious head
(Cast in the way of Treason) we must stay
His full chace of our ruine and our Realme;
This houre shall take vpon her shady winges
His latest liberty and life to Hell.
We are vndone?
Whats that?
I heard him not;
Madam y'are honord much, that Duke Byron
Is so obseruant; Some, to cardes with him,
You foure, as now you come, sit to Primero;
And I will fight a battayle at the Chesse;
A good safe fight beleeue me; Other warre
Thirsts blood, and wounds, and his thirst quencht, is thankles;
Lift, and then cut;
Tis right the end of lifting,
When men are lifted to their highest pitch,
They cut of those that lifted them so high.
Apply you all these sports so seriously?
They first were from our serious acts deuis'd,
The best of which, are to the best but sports;
(I meane by best, the greatest) for their ends,
In men that serue them best, are their owne pleasures.
So, in those best mens seruices, their ends
Are their owne pleasures; passe.
I vy't;
I see't;
And wonder at his frontles impudence;
How speedes your Maiestie?
Well; the Duke instructs me
With such graue lessons of mortallitie
Forc't out of our light sport; that if I loose,
I cannot but speed well.
Some idle talke.
For Courtship sake, you know does not amisse.
Would we might heare some of it.
That you shall,
I cast away a card now, makes me thinke,
Of the deceased worthy King of Spaine.
What card was that?
The King of hearts (my Lord)
Whose name yeelds well the memorie of that King,
Who was indeed the worthy King of hearts,
And had, both of his subiects hearts, and strangers,
Much more then all the Kings of Christendome.
He wun them with his gold.
He wun them chiefely,
With his so generall Pietie and Iustice:
And as the little, yet great Macedon,
Was sayd with his humane philosophy,
To teach the rapefull Hyrcans, mariage;
And bring the barbarous Sogdians, to nourish,
Not kill their aged Parents; as before,
Th' incestuous Persians to reuerence
Their mothers, not to vse them as their wiues;
The Indians to adore the Grecian Gods,
The Scythians to inter, not eate their Parents;
So he, with his diuine Philosophy,
(Which I may call his, since he chiefely vsd it)
In Turky, India, and through all the world,
Expell'd prophane idolatry; and from earth,
Raisd temples to the highest: whom with the word,
He could not winne, he iustly put to sword,
He sought for gold, and Empire.
Twas Religion,
And her full propagation that he sought;
If gold had beene his end, it had beene hoorded,
When he had fetcht it in so many fleetes:
Which he spent not on Median Luxurie,
Banquets, and women; Calidonian wine,
Nor deare Hyrcanian fishes, but emploid it,
To propagate his Empire; and his Empire
Desird t'extend so, that he might withall,
Extend Religion through it, and all nations,
Reduce to one firme constitution,
Of Pietie, Iustice, and one publique weale;
To which end he made all his matchles subiects
Make tents their castles, and their garisons;
True Catholikes contrimen; and their allies,
Heretikes, strangers, and their enemies.
There was in him the magnanimity.
To temper your extreame applause (my Lord)
Shorten, and answere all things in a word,
The greatest commendation we can giue
To the remembrance of that King deceast;
Is, that he spar'd not his owne eldest sonne,
But put him iustly to a violent death,
Because, hee sought to trouble his estates.
Ist so?
That bit (my Lord) vpon my life,
Twas bitterly replied, and doth amaze him.
It is resolud,
A worke shall now be done,
Which, while learnd Atlas shall with starres be crownd,
While th' Ocean walkes in stormes his wauy round,
While Moones at full, repaire their broken rings:
While Lucifer fore-shewes Auroras springs,
And Arctos stickes aboue the Earth vnmou'd,
Shall make my realme be blest, and me beloued;
Call in the count D' Auuergne.
A word my Lord.
Will you become as wilfull as your friend?
And draw a mortall iustice on your heads,
That hangs so blacke and is so loth to strike?
If you would vtter what I knowe you knowe,
Of his inhumaine treason; one Stronge Barre,
Betwixt his will, and duty were dissolud.
For then I know he would submit himselfe;
Thinke you it not as stronge a point of faith,
To rectifie your loyalties to me,
As to be trusty in ech others wrong?
Trust that deceiues our selues in treachery,
And Truth that truth conceales an open lie;
My Lord if I could vtter any thought,
Instructed with disloyalty to you,
And might light any safty to my friend;
Though mine owne heart came after it should out;
I knowe you may, and that your faith's affected
To one another, are so vaine and faulce,
That your owne Strengths will ruine you: ye contend,
To cast vp rampiers to you in the sea,
And striue to stop the waues that runne before you,
All this my Lord to me is misery.
It is; Ile make it plaine enouge. Beleeue me.
Come my Lord Chancellor let vs end our mate.
You are vndone my Lord;
Is it possible?
Play good my Lord: whom looke you for?
Your mind,
Is not vpon your Game,
Play, pray you play,
Enough, tis late, and time to leaue our play,
On all hands; all forbeare the roome, my Lord?
Stay you with me; yet is your will resolued,
To dewty, and the maine bond of your life?
I sweare (of all th' Intrusions I haue made,
Vpon your owne good, and continew'd fortunes)
This is the last; informe me yet the truth,
And here I vow to you, (by all my loue;
By all meanes showne you, euen to this extreame,
When all men else forsake you) you are safe.
What passages haue slipt twixt count Fuentes,
You, and the Duke of Sauoye?
Good my Lord.
This nayle is driuen already past the head,
You much haue ouerchargd, an honest man:
And I beseech you yeeld my Inocence iustice,
(But with my single valure) gainst them all,
That thus haue poisoned your opinion of me,
And let me take my vengeance by my sword:
For I protest, I neuer thought an Action,
More then my tongue hath vtterd.
Would twere true.
And that your thoughts and deeds, had fell no fouler.
But you disdaine submission, not remembring,
That (in intentes vrdgd for the common good)
He that shall hould his peace being chardgd to speake:
Doth all the peace and nerues of Empire breake
Which on your conscience lie, adieu, good night.
Kings hate to heare what they command men speake,
Aske life, and to desert of death ye yeeld.
Where Medicins loath, it yrcks men to be heald,
Resigne your sword (my Lord) the King commands it.
Me to resigne my sword? what king is he,
Hath vsd it better for the realme then I?
My sword, that all the warres within the length,
Breadth and the whole dimensions of great France,
Hath sheathd betwixt his hilt and horrid point?
And fixt ye all in such a florishing Peace?
My sword that neuer enimie could inforce,
Bereft me by my friendes? Now, good my Lord,
Beseech the King, I may resigne my sword,
To his hand onely.
You must do your office,
The King commands you;
Tis in vaine to striue,
For I must force it;
Haue I never a friend,
That beares another for me? All the Guard?
What will you kill me? will you smother here
His life that can command, and saue in field,
A hundred thousand liues? For man-hood sake;
Lend something to this poore forsaken hand;
For all my seruice, let me haue the honor
To dye defending of my innocent selfe,
And haue some little space to pray to God.
Come, you are an Atheist Byron, and a Traytor,
Both foule and damnable; Thy innocent selfe?
No Leper is so buried quicke in vlcers
As thy corrupted soule: Thou end the war?
And settle peace in France? what war hath rag'd,
Into whose fury I haue not exposed
My person with is as free a spirit as thine?
Thy worthy Father, and thy selfe, combinde,
And armed in all the merits of your valors;
(Your bodyes thrust amidst the thickest fight)
Neuer were bristeld with so many battayles
Nor on the foe haue broke such woods of Launces
As grew vpon my thigh; and I haue Marshald;
I am ashamed to bragge thus; where enuy
And arrogance, their opposit Bulwarke raise;
Men are allowd to vse their proper praise;
Away with him;
Away with him? liue I?
And here my life thus sleighted? cursed man,
That euer the intelligensing lights
Betraid me to mens whorish fellowships;
To Princes Moorish slaueries; To be made
The Anuille, on which onely blowes, and woundes
Were made the seed, and wombs of others honors;
A property for a Tyrant, to set vp,
And puffe downe, with the vapour of his breath;
Will you not kill me?
No; we will not hurt you,
We are commanded onely to conduct you
Into your lodging;
To my lodging? where?
Within the Cabynet of Armes my Lord:
What to a prison? Death; I will not go;
Weele force you then;
And take away my sword;
A proper point of force; ye had as good,
Haue rob'd me of my soule; Slaues of my Starrs,
Partiall and bloody; O that in mine eyes
Were all the Sorcerous poyson of my woes,
That I might witch ye headlong from your height,
And trample ou't, your excrable light.
Come will you go my Lord? this rage is vaine;
And so is all your graue authority;
And that all France shall feele before I Die;
Ye see all how they vse good Catholiques;
Farewell for euer; so haue I discern'd
An exhalation that would be a Starre
Fall when the Sunne forsooke it, in a sincke.
Shooes euer ouerthrow that are too large,
And hugest canons, burst with ouercharge.
My Lord I haue commandment from the King,
To charge you go with me, and aske your sword;
My sword, who feares it? it was n'ere the death
Of any but wilde Bores; I prithee take it;
Hadst thou aduertis'd this when last we met,
I had bene in my bed, and fast asleepe
Two houres a goe; lead; ile go where thou wilt:
See how he beares his crosse, with his small strength,
On easier shoulders then the other Atlas.
Strength to aspire is still accompanied
With weakenes to indure; All popular gifts,
Are coullors, it will beare no vineger;
And rather to aduerse affaires, betray
Thine arme against them; his State still his best
That hath most inward worth; and that's best tryed,
That neither glories, nor is glorified.
What shall we thinke (my Lords) of these new forces
That (from the King of Spaine) hath past the Alps?
For which (I thinke) his Lord Ambassador,
Is come to Court, to get their passe for Flanders?
I thinke (my Lord) they haue no end for Flanders;
Count Maurice being allready entred Brabant
To passe to Flanders, to relieue Ostend,
And th'Arch-duke full prepar'd to hinder him;
And sure it is that they must measure forces,
Which (ere this new force could haue past the Alps)
Of force must be incountred.
Tis vnlikely,
That their march hath so large an ayme as Flanders;
As these times sort, they may haue shorter reaches;
That would pierce further;
I haue bene aduertis'd,
That Count Fuentes (by whose meanes this army
Was lately leuied; And whose hand was strong,
In thrusting on Byrons conspiracie)
Hath caus'd these cunning forces to aduance,
With coullor onely to set downe in Flanders;
But hath intentionall respect to fauor
And countnance his false Partizans in Bresse,
And friendes in Burgondie; to giue them hart
For the full taking of their hearts from me;
Be as it will; we shall preuent theyr worst,
And therefore call in Spaines Ambassador,
What would the Lord Ambassador of Spaine?
First (in my maisters name) I would beseech
Your highnes hearty thought; That his true hand,
(Held in your vowd amities) hath not toucht,
At any least point in Byrons offence;
Nor once had notice of a cryme so foule;
Whereof, since he doubts not, you stand resolu'd,
He prayes your Leagues continuance in this fauor;
That the army he hath rais'd to march for Flanders,
May haue safe passage by your frontier townes,
And finde the Riuer free, that runs by Rhosne.
My Lord my frontiers shall not be disarm'd,
Till, by araignment of the Duke of Byron,
My scruples are resolu'd; and I may know
In what account to hold your Maisters faith,
For his obseruance of the League betwixt vs;
You wish me to beleeue that he is cleare
From all the proiects caus'd by Cont Fuentes,
His speciall Agent; But where, deedes, pull downe,
Words, may repaire, no faith; I scarce can thinke
That his gold was so bounteously employd,
Without his speciall counsaile, and command:
These faint proceedings in our Royall faiths,
Make subiects proue so faithlesse: If because,
We sit aboue the danger of the lawes,
We likewise lift our Armes aboue their iustice;
And that our heauenly Soueraigne, bounds not vs
In those religious confines; out of which
Our iustice and our true lawes are inform'd;
In vaine haue we expectance that our subiects,
Should not as well presume to offend their Earthly,
As we our Heauenly Soueraigne? And this breach
Made in the Forts of all Society;
Of all celestiall, and humane respects,
Makes no strengths of our bounties, counsailes armes,
Hold out against their treasons; and the rapes
Made of humanitie and religion,
In all mens more then Pagan liberties,
Atheismes, and slaveries, will deriue their springs
From their base Presidents, copied out of kings.
But all this, shall not make me breake the commerce,
Authorisde by our treaties; let your Armie
Take the directest passe, it shall goe safe.
So rest your highnesse euer; and assurde
That my true Soueraigne, lothes all opposite thoughts.
Are our dispatches made to all the kings,
Princes, and Potentates, of Christendome?
Ambassadors and Prouince gouernors,
T'enforme the truth of this conspiracie?
They all are made my Lord, and some giue out,
That 'tis a blow giuen to religion,
To weaken it, in ruining of him,
That said, he neuer wisht more glorious title,
Then to be call'd the scourge of Hugenots.
Others that are like fauourers of the fault,
Said 'tis a politique aduise from England,
To breake the feared Iauelins, both together.
Such shut their eyes to truth, we can but set
His lights before them, and his trumpet sound
Close to their eares; their partiall wilfulnesse,
In resting blinde, and deafe, or in peruerting,
What their most certaine sences apprehend,
Shall naught discomfort our impartiall Iustice.
Nor cleere the desperat fault that doth enforce it.
The Peeres of France (my Lord) refuse t'appeare,
At the arraignement of the Duke Byron.
The Court may yet proceed; and so command it,
'Tis not their slacknesse to appeare shall serue,
To let my will t'appeare in any fact.
Wherein the bouldest of them tempts my iustice.
I am resolu'd, and will no more endure,
To haue my subiects make what I command,
The subiect of their oppositions,
Who euer-more slack their allegiance,
As kings forbeare their pennance; how sustaine
Your prisoners their strange durance?
One of them,
(Which is the Count D'Avuergne) hath merry spirits,
Eates well, and sleepes: and neuer can imagine,
That any place where he is, is a prison;
Where on the other part, the Duke Byron,
Enterd his prison, as into his graue,
Reiects all food, sleepes not, nor once lyes downe:
Furie hath arm'd his thoughts so thick with thornes,
That rest can haue no entry: he disdaines
To grace the prison with the slendrest show,
Of any patience, least men should conceiue,
He thought his sufferance in the best sort fit;
And holds his bands so worthlesse of his worth,
That he empaires it, to vouchsafe to them,
The best part of the peace, that freedom owes it:
That patience therein, is a willing slauerie.
And (like the Cammell) stoopes to take the load:
So still he walkes: or rather as a Byrde,
Enterd a Closet, which vnwares is made,
His desperate prison (being pursude) amazd,
And wrathfull beates his breast from wall to wall,
Assaults the light, strikes downe himselfe, not our,
And being taken, struggles, gaspes, and bites,
Takes all his takers strokings, to be strokes,
Abhorreth food, and with a sauadge will,
Frets, pines, and dyes, for former libertie.
So fares the wrathfull Duke; and when the strength
Of these dumbe rages, breake out unto sounds,
He breaths defiance to the world, and bids vs,
Make our selues drunke, with the remaining bloud
Of fiue and thirty wounds receiud in fight,
For vs and ours; for we shall neuer brag,
That we haue made his spirits check at death:
This rage in walkes and words; but in his lookes
He cements all: and prints a world of bookes,
Let others learne by him to curb their spleenes,
Before they be curbd; and to cease their grudges:
Now I am setled in my Sunne of height,
The circulare splendor, and full Sphere of State
Take all place vp from enuy: as the sunne,
At height, and passiue ore the crownes of men,
His beames diffusd, and downe-right pourd on them,
Cast but a little or no shade at all,
So he that is aduanc'd aboue the heads,
Of all his Emulators, with high light,
Preuents their enuies, and depriues them quite.
I wonder at the prisoners so long stay,
I thinke it may be made a question,
If his impacience will let him come.
Yes, he is now well stayd: Time and his Iudgment,
Haue cast his passion and his feuer of.
His feuer may be past, but for his passions,
I feare me we shall find it spic'd to hotly,
With his ould poulder.
He is sure come forth;
The Carosse of the Marquis of Rhosny
Conducted him along to th' Arcenall,
Close to the Riuer-side: and there I saw him,
Enter a barge couered with Tapistry,
In which the kings gards waited and receiued him.
Stand by there cleere the place,
The prisoner comes.
My Lord Laffin forbeare your sight a while,
It may incense the prisoner: who will know,
By your attendance nere vs, that your hand,
Was chiefe in his discouery; which as yet,
I thinke he doth not doubt,
I will forbeare,
Till your good pleasures call me,
When he knowes
And sees Laffin, accuse him to his face,
The Court I thinke will shake with his distemper.
You see my Lord, 'tis in the golden chamber.
The golden chamber? where the greatest Kings
Haue thought them honor'd to receiue a place:
And I haue had it; am I come to stand
In ranke and habite here of men arraignd,
Where I haue sat assistant, and beene honord,
With glorious title of the chiefest vertuous,
Where the Kings chiefe Solicitor hath said,
There was in France, no man that euer liu'd,
Whose parts were worth my imitation;
That, but mine owne worth; I could imitate none:
And that I made my selfe inimitable,
To all that could come after; whom this Court
Hath seene to sit vpon the Flower de Lice
In recompence of my renowned seruice.
Must I be sat on now, by petty Iudges?
These Scarlet robes, that come to sit and fight
Against my life; dismay my valure more,
Then all the bloudy Cassocks Spaine hath brought
To field against it.
To the barre my Lord.
Read the inditement.
Stay, I will inuert
(For shortnesse sake) the forme of our proceedings,
And out of all the points, the processe holds,
Collect fiue principall, with which we charge you.
First you conferd with one, cald Picote,
At Orleance borne, and into Flanders fled,
To hold intelligence by him with the Archduke,
And for two voyages to that effect,
Bestowd on him, fiue hundred, fiftie crownes.
Next you held treaty with the Duke of Sauoy,
Without the Kings permission; offering him
All seruice and assistance gainst all men,
In hope to haue in marriage, his third daughter.
Thirdly you held intelligence with the Duke,
At taking in of Bourge, and other Forts;
Aduising him, with all your preiudice,
Gainst the Kings armie, and his royall person.
The fourth is; that you would haue brought the King,
Before Saint Katherines Fort, to be there slaine:
And to that end writ to the Gouernor,
In which you gaue him notes to know his highnesse.
Fiftly, you sent Laffin to treate with Sauoy,
And with the Count Fuentes, of more plots,
Touching the ruine of the King and realme.
All this (my Lord) I answer, and deny:
And first for Picoté; he was my prisoner,
And therefore I might well conferre with him:
But that our conference tended to the Arch-duke,
Is nothing so; I onely did employ him
To Captaine La Fortune, for the reduction
Of Seurre, to the seruice of the King.
Who vsd such speedy dilligence therein,
That shortly 'twas assur'd his Maiestie,
Next, for my treaties with the Duke of Sauoy,
Roncas his Secretarie, hauing made
A motion to me, for the Dukes third daughter,
I tolde it to the King; who hauing since,
Giuen me the vnderstanding by La Force
Of his dislike; I neuer dreamd of it.
Thirdly, for my intelligence with the Duke,
Aduising him against his Highnesse armie:
Had this beene true, I had not vndertaken
Th'assault of Bourg, against the Kings opinion,
Hauing assistance but by them about me:
And (hauing wunne it for him) had not beene
Put out of such a gouernment so easily.
Fourthly, for my aduise to kill the King;
I would beseech his Highnesse memory,
Not to let slip, that I alone diswaded
His viewing of that Fort; informing him,
It had good marke-men; and he could not goe,
But in exceeding danger, which aduise
Diuerted him; the rather, since I said,
That if he had desire to see the place
He should receiue from me a Plot of it;
Offering to take it with fiue hundred men,
And I my selfe would go to the assault.
And lastly, for intelligences held,
With Sauoy and Fuentes: I confesse,
That being denyed to keepe the Cytadell,
Which with incredible perill I had got,
And seeing another, honor'd with my spoiles,
I  grew so sperate that I found my spirit,
Enrag'd to any act, and wisht my selfe,
Couer'd with bloud.
With whose bloud?
With mine owne;
Wishing to liue no longer, being denyed,
With such suspition of me, and set will,
To rack my furious humor into bloud.
And for two moneths space, I did speake, and wright,
More then I ought; but haue done euer well,
And therefore your enformers haue beene false.
And (with intent to tyranize) subornd.
What if our witnesses come face to face,
And iustifie much more then we alledge?
They must be hirelings then, and men corrupted.
What thinke you of La Fin?
I hold La Fin,
An honor'd Gentleman, my friend and kinsman.
If he then aggrauate, what we affirme,
With greater accusations to your face,
What will you say?
I know it cannot be.
Call in my Lord La Fin.
Is he so neere?
And kept so close from me? can all the world,
Make him a treacher.
I suppose my Lord,
You haue not stood within; without the eare
Of what hath heere beene vrgd against the Duke;
If you haue heard it, and vpon your knowledge
Can witnesse all is true, vpon your soule;
Vtter your knowledge.
I haue heard my Lord,
All that hath past here; and vpon my soule,
(Being chargd so vrgently in such a Court)
Vpon my knowledge I affirme all true;
And so much more: as had the prisoner liues
As many as his yeares, would make all forfaite.
O all yee vertuous powers, in earth and heauen,
That haue not put on hellish flesh and blood,
From whence these monstrous issues are produc'd,
That cannot beare in execrable concord,
And one prodigious subiect, contraries;
Nor (as the Ile that of the world admirde)
Is seuerd from the world) can cut your selues
From the consent and sacred hermonie
Of life, yet liue; of honor, yet be honord;
As this extrauagant, and errant roge,
From all your faire Decorums, and iust lawes,
Findes powre to doe: and like a lothesome wen,
Sticks to the face of nature, and this Court;
Thicken this ayre, and turne your plaguie rage,
Into a shape as dismall as his sinne.
And with some equall horror teare him of
From sight and memory: let not such a court,
To whose fame all the Kings of Christendome,
Now laid their eares; so crack her royall Trumpe,
As to sound through it, that here vanted iustice
Was got in such an incest: is it iustice
To tempt, and witch a man, to breake the law,
And by that witch condemne him? let me draw
Poison into me with this cursed ayre,
If he bewitcht me, and transformd me not;
He bit me by the eare, and made me drinke
Enchanted waters; let me see an Image
That vtterd these distinct words; Thou shalt dye,
O wicked King; and if the diuill gaue him
Such powre vpon an Image; vpon me
How might he tyrannize that by his vowes
And othes so Stygian, had my Nerues and will,
In more awe then his owne? what man is he
That is so high, but he would higher be?
So roundly sighted, but he may be found,
To haue a blinde side, which by craft, persude,
Confederacie, and simply trusted treason,
May wrest him past his Angell, and his reason?
Witchcraft can neuer taint an honest minde.
True gold, will any triall stand, vntoucht.
For coulours that will staine when they are tryed,
The cloth it selfe is euer cast aside.
Some-times, the very Glosse in any thing,
Will seeme a staine; the fault not in the light,
Nor in the guilty obiect, but our sight.
My glosse, raisd from the richnesse of my stuffe,
Had too much splendor for the Owly eye,
Of politique and thanklesse royaltie:
I did deserue too much; a plurisie
Of that blood in me is the cause I dye.
Vertue in great men must be small and sleight:
For poore starres rule, where she is exquisite,
Tis tyrannous, and impious policie,
To put to death by fraude and trecherie;
Sleight is then royall, when it makes men liue,
And if it vrge faults, vrgeth to forgiue.
He must be guiltlesse, that condemnes the guiltie,
Like things, do nourish like, and not destroy them:
Mindes must be sound, that iudge affaires of weight,
And seeing hands, cut corosiues from your sight.
A Lord intelligencer? hangman-like?
Thrust him from humaine fellowship, to the desarts
Blowe him with curses; shall your iustice call
Treacherie her Father? would you wish her weigh
My valure with the hisse of such a viper?
What I haue done to shunne the mortall shame,
Of so vniust an opposition;
My enuious starres cannot deny me this,
That I may make my Iudges witnesses;
And that my wretched fortunes haue reseru'd
For my last comfort; yee all know (my Lords)
This body gasht with fiue and thirty wounds,
Whose life and death you haue in your award,
Holds not a veine that hath not opened beene,
And which I would not open yet againe,
For you and yours; this hand that writ the lines
Alledgd against me; hath enacted still,
More good then there it onely talkt of ill.
I must confesse my choller hath transferd
My tender spleene to all intemperate speech:
But reason euer did my deeds attend.
In worth of praise, and imitation,
Had I borne any will to let them loose,
I could haue flesht them with bad seruices,
In England lately, and in Swizerland:
There are a hundred Gentlemen by name,
Can witnesse my demeanure in the first;
And in the last Ambassage I adiure
No other testimonies then the Seigneurs
De Vio, and Sillerie; who amply know,
In what sort, and with what fidelitie
I bore my selfe; to reconcile and knit,
In one desire so many wills disioynde,
And from the Kings allegiance quite with-drawne.
My acts ask'd many men, though done by one.
And I were but one, I stood for thousands,
And still I hold my worth, though not my place:
Nor sleight me, Iudges, though I be but one,
One man, in one sole expedition,
Reduc'd into th'imperiall powre of Rome,
Armenia, Pontus, and Arabia, Syria, Albania, and Iberia,
Conquerd th'Hyreanians; and to Caucasus,
His arme extended; the Numidians
And Affrick to the shores Meridionall,
His powre subiected; and that part of Spaine
Which stood from those parts that Sertorius rulde,
Euen to the Atlantique Sea he conquered.
Th'Albanian kings, he from the kingdoms chac'd,
And at the Caspian Sea, their dwellings plac'd:
Of all the Earths globe, by powre and his aduice,
The round-eyd Ocean saw him victor thrice:
And what shall let me (but your cruell doome,)
To adde as much to France, as he to Rome,
And to leaue Iustice neither Sword nor word,
To vse against my life; this Senate knowes,
That what with one victorious hand I tooke,
I gaue to all your vses, with another:
With this I tooke, and propt the falling kingdome,
And gaue it to the King: I haue kept
Your lawes of state from fire; and you your selues,
Fixt in this high Tribunall; from whose height
The vengefull Saturnals of the League
Had hurld yee head-long; doe yee then returne
This retribution? can the cruell King,
The kingdome, lawes, and you, (all sau'd by me)
Destroy their sauer? what (aye me) I did
Aduerse to this; this damnd Enchanter did,
That tooke into his will, my motion;
And being banck-route both of wealth and worth,
Pursued with quarrels, and with suites in law;
Feard by the kingdome; threatned by the king;
Would raise the loathed dung-hill of his ruines,
Vpon the monumentall heape of mine:
Torne with possessed whirle-winds may he dye,
And dogs barke at his murthorous memory,
My Lord, our liberall sufferance of your speech,
Hath made it late; and for this Session,
We will dismisse you; take him back my Lord.
You likewise may depart.
What resteth now
To be decreed gainst this great prisoner?
A mighty merit, and a monstrous crime,
Are here concurrent; what by witnesses
His letters and instructions, we haue prou'd
Himselfe confesseth, and excuseth all
With witch-craft, and the onely act of thought.
For witch-craft I esteeme it a meere strength
Of rage in him conceiu'd gainst his accuser;
Who being examinde hath denied it all;
Suppose it true, it made him false; But wills
And worthy mindes, witch-craft can neuer force.
And for his thoughts that brake not into deeds;
Time was the cause, not will; the mindes free act
In treason still is Iudgd as th'outward fact.
If his deserts haue had a wealthy share,
In sauing of our land from ciuill furies:
Manlius had so that fast the Capitoll;
Yet for his after traiterous factions,
They threw him head-long from the place he sau'd.
My definite sentence then, doth this import:
That we must quench the wilde-fire with his bloud,
In which it was so traiterously inflam'd;
Vnlesse with it, we seeke to incence the land,
The King can haue no refuge for his life,
If his be quitted: this was it that made
Lewis th'eleuenth renounce his countrymen,
And call the valiant Scots out of their kingdome,
To vse their greater vertues, and their faiths,
Then his owne subiects, in his royall guarde:
What then conclude your censures?
He must dye.
Draw then his sentence, formally, and send him;
And so all treasons in his death attend him.
I ioy you had so good a day my Lord.
I wone it from them all: the Chancellor
I answerd to his vttermost improuements:
I mou'd my other Iudges to lament
My insolent misfortunes; and to lothe
The pockie soule, and state-bawde, my accuser,
I made replie to all that could be said,
So eloquently, and with such a charme,
Of graue enforcements, that me thought I sat,
Like Orpheus casting reignes on sauage beasts;
At the armes end (as twere) I tooke my barre
And set it farre aboue the high tribunall,
Where like a Cedar on Mount Lebanon,
I Grew, and made my iudges show like Box-trees;
And Boxtrees right, their wishes would haue made them,
Whence boxes should haue growne, till they had strooke
My head into the budget: but ahlas,
I held their bloudy armes, with such strong reasons;
And (by your leaue) with such a jerck of wit:
That I fetcht bloud vpon the Chancelors cheekes,
Me thinkes I see his countinance as he sat;
And the most lawyerly deliuery
Of his set speeches: shall I play his part?
For heauens sake, good my Lord.
I will ifaith,
Behold a wicked man: A man debaucht,
A man, contesting with his King; A man,
On whom (my Lords) we are not to conniue,
Though we may condole: A man
That Laesa Maiestate sought a lease,
Of Plus quam satis. A man that vi et armis
Assaild the King; and would per fas et nefas,
Aspire the kingdome: here was lawiers learning.
He said not this my Lord, that I haue heard.
This or the like, I sweare I pen no speeches.
Then there is good hope of your wisht acquitall.
Acquitall? they haue reason; were I dead
I know they can not all supply my place;
Ist possible the King should be so vaine,
To thinke he can shake me with feare of death?
Or make me apprehend that he intends it?
Thinkes he to make his firmest men, his clowds?
The clowdes (obseruing their Aeriall natures)
Are borne aloft, and then to moisture hang'd,
Fall to the earth; where being made thick, and cold,
They loose both al their heate, and leuitie;
Yet then againe recouering heate and lightnesse,
Againe they are aduanc't: and by the Sunne
Made fresh and glorious; and since clowdes are rapt
With these vncertainties: now vp, now downe,
Am I to flit so with his smile, or froune?
I wish your comforts, and incoradgments,
May spring out of your saftie; but I heare
The King hath reasond so against your life,
And made your most friends yeeld so to his reasons,
That your estate is fearefull.
Yeeld t' his reasons?
O how friends reasons, and their freedomes stretch,
When powre sets his wide tenters to their sides!
How, like a cure, by mere opinion,
It workes vpon our bloud? like th' antient Gods
Are Moderne Kings, that liu'd past bounds themselues,
Yet set a measure downe, to wretched men;
By many Sophismes, they made good, deceipt;
And, since they past in powre, surpast, in right:
When Kings wills passe; the starres winck, and the Sunne,
Suffers eclips: rude thunder yeelds to them
His horrid wings: sits smoothe as glasse engazd,
And lightning sticks twixt heauen and earth amazd:
Mens faiths are shaken: and the pit of truth
O'reflowes with darkenesse, in which Iustice sits,
And keepes her vengeance tied to make it fierce;
And when it comes, th' encreased horrors showe,
Heauens plague is sure, though full of state, and slowe.
O my deare Lord and brother,
O the Duke?
What sounds are these my Lord? hark, hark, me thinks
I heare the cries of people.
Tis for one,
Wounded in fight here at Saint Anthonies Gate:
Sfoote, one cried the Duke. I pray harken,
Againe, or burst your selues with silence, no:
What contriman's the common headsman here?
He's a Bourgonian.
The great deuill he is,
The bitter wizerd told me, a Burgonian,
Should be my headsman; strange concurrences:
S'death, whose here?
O then I am but dead,
Now, now ye come all to pronounce my sentence.
I am condemn'd vniustly: tell my kinsfolkes,
I die an innocent:
If any friend pittie the ruine of the States sustainer
Proclaime my innocence; ah Lord Chancelor,
Is there no pardon? will there come no mercie?
I, put your hat on, and let me stand bare,
Showe your selfe right a Lawier.
I am bare,
What would you haue me do?
You haue not done,
Like a good iustice; and one that knew
He sat vpon the precious bloud of vertue;
Y'aue pleasd the cruell King, and haue not borne,
As great regard to saue as to condemne;
You haue condemn'd me, my Lord Chancelor,
But God acquites me; he will open lay
All your close treasons against him, to collour
Treasons layd to his truest images;
And you my Lord shall answere this iniustice,
Before his iudgement seate: to which I summon
In one yeare and a daie your hot appearance;
I goe before, by mens corrupted domes;
But they that caus'd my death, shall after come
By the imaculate iustice of the highest.
Well, good my Lord, commend your soule to him,
And to his mercie, thinke of that, I pray.
Sir, I haue thought of it, and euery howre,
Since my affliction, askt on naked knees
Patience to beare your vnbeleeued Iniustice:
But you, nor none of you haue thought of him,
In my euiction: y'are come to your benches,
With plotted iudgements; your linckt eares so lowd,
Sing with preiudicate windes, that nought is heard,
Of all, pore prisoners vrge gainst your award;
Passion, my Lord, transports your bitternes,
Beyond all collour; and your propper iudgement:
No man hath knowne your merits more then I;
And would to God your great misdedes had beene,
As much vndone, as they haue beene concealde;
The cries of them for iustice (in desert)
Haue beene so lowd and piersing; that they deafned
The eares of mercie; and haue labord more,
Your Iudges to compresse then to enforce them.
We bring you here your sentence, will you reade it.
For heauens sake, shame to vse me with such rigor;
I know what it imports, and will not haue,
Mine eare blowne into flames with hearing it;
Haue you beene one of them that haue condemn'd me?
My Lord I am your Orator: God comfort you.
Good Sir, my father lou'd you so entirely,
That if you haue beene one, my soule forgiues you;
It is the King (most childish that he is
That takes what he hath giuen) that iniures me:
He gaue grace in the first draught of my fault,
And now restaines it: grace againe I aske;
Let him againe vouchsafe it: send to him,
A post will soone returne: the Queene of England,
Told me that if the wilfull Earle of Essex,
Had vsd submission, and but askt her mercie,
She would haue giuen it, past resumption;
She (like a gratious Princesse) did desire
To pardon him: euen as she praid to God,
He would let doune a pardon vnto her;
He yet was guiltie, I am innocent:
He still refusd grace, I importune it.
This askt in time (my Lord) while he besought it,
And ere he had made his seuerity knowne,
Had (with much ioye to him) I know beene granted;
No, no, his bountie, then was misery,
To offer when he knew twould be refusde;
He treads the vulgar pathe of all aduantage,
And loues men, for his vices, nor for their vertues;
My seruice would haue quickn'd gratitude,
In his owne death, had he beene truely royall;
It would haue stirr'd the image of a King,
Into perpetuall motion to haue stood
Neere the conspiracie restraind at Mantes;
And in a danger, that had then the Woulfe,
To flie vpon his bosome, had I onely held
Intelligence with the conspirators;
Who stuck at no check but my loyaltie,
Nor kept life in their hopes, but in my death;
The seege of Amiens, would haue softned rocks,
Where couer'd all in showers of shot and fire,
I seem'd to all mens eyes a fighting flame
With bullets cut, in fashion of a man;
A sacrifize to valure (impious King)
Which he will needes extinguish, with my bloud;
Let him beware, iustice will fall from heauen,
In the same forme I serued in that seege,
And by the light of that, he shall decerne,
What good, my ill hath brought him; it will nothing,
Assure his State: the same quench he hath cast
Vpon my life, shall quite put out his fame;
This day he looseth, what he shall not finde,
By all daies he suruiues; so good a seruant,
Nor Spaine so great a foe; with whom, ahlas,
Because I treated am I put to death?
Tis put a politique glose: my courage rais'd me,
For the deare price of fiue and thirtie skarres,
And that hath ruin'd me, I thanke my Starres.
Come ile goe where yee will, yee shall not lead me.
I feare his frenzie,
Neuer saw I man of such a spirit so amaz'd at death.
He alters euery minute: what a vapor
The strongest minde is to a storme of crosses?
O of what contraries consists a man!
Of what impossible mixtures? vice and vertue,
Corruption, and eternnesse, at one time,
And in one subiect, let together, loosse!
We haue not any strength but weakens vs,
No greatnes but doth crush vs into ayre.
Our knowledges, do light vs but to erre,
Our Ornaments are Burthens: Our delightss
Are our tormentors; fiendes that (raisd in feares)
At parting shake our Roofes about our eares.
O vertue, thou art now farre worse then Fortune;
Her gifts stucke by the Duke, when thine are vanisht,
Thou brau'st thy friend in Neede: Necessity,
That vsd to keepe thy welth, contempt, thy loue,
Haue both abandond thee in his extreames,
Thy powers are shadowes, and thy comfort, dreames,
O reall goodnesse if thou be a power!
And not a word alone, in humaine vses,
Appere out of this angry conflagration,
Where this great Captaine (thy late Temple) burns,
And turne his vicious fury to thy flame,
From all earths hopes mere guilded with thy fame:
Let pietie enter with her willing crosse,
And take him on it; ope his brest and armes,
To all the Storms, Necessity can breath,
And burst them all with his embraced death,
Yet are the ciuille tumults of his spirits,
Hot and outragiouse: not resolued, Ahlas,
(Being but one man) render the kingdomes dome;
He doubts, stormes, threatens, rues, complains, implores,
Griefe hath brought all his forces to his lookes,
And nought is left to strengthen him within,
Nor lasts one habite of those greeu'd aspects:
Blood expells palenesse, palenes Blood doth chace,
And sorrow errs through all forms in his face,
So furiouse is he, that the Politique law,
Is much to seeke, how to enact her sentence:
Authority backt with arms, (though he vnarmd)
Abhorrs his furie, and with doubtfull eyes,
Views on what ground it should sustaine his ruines,
And as a Sauadge Bore that (hunted longe,
Assayld and set vp) with his onely eyes,
Swimming in fire keepes of the baying hounds,
Though suncke himselfe, yet houlds his anger vp,
And snowes it forth in foame; houlds firme his stand,
Of Battailouse Bristles: feedes his hate to die,
And whets his tuskes with wrathfull maiesty.
So fares the furious Duke, and with his lookes,
Doth teach death horrors; makes the hangman learne
New habites for his bloody impudence,
Which now habituall horror from him driues,
Who for his life shunns death, by which he liues.
Will not your Lordshippe haue the Duke distinguisht
From other prisoners? where the order is,
To giue vp men condemd into the hands
Of th' executioner; he would be the death
Of him that he should die by, ere he sufferd,
Such an abiection
But to bind his hands
I hold it passing needefull,
Tis my Lord,
And very dangerous to bring him loose.
You will in all dispaire and fury plunge him,
If you but offer it.
My Lord by this,
The prisoners Spirit is some-thing pacified,
And tis a feare that th'offer of those bands,
Would breed fresh furies in him, and disturbe,
The entry of his soule into her peace,
I would not that, for any possible danger,
That can be wrought, by his vnarmed hands,
And therefore in his owne forme bring him in.
Where shall this weight fall? on what rhegion,
Must this declining prominent poure his lode?
Ile breake my bloods high billows gainst my starrs,
Before this hill be shooke into a flat,
All France shall feele an earthquake; with what murmur,
This world shrinkes into Chaos?
Good my Lord,
Forgoe it willingly; and now resigne,
Your sensuall powers entirely to your soule.
Horror of death, let me alone in peace,
And leaue my soule to me, whome it concernes;
You haue no charge of it; I feele her free,
How she doth rowze, and like a Faulcon stretch
Her siluer wings as threatening death, with death;
At whom I ioyfully will cast her off:
I know this bodie but a sinck of folly,
The ground-work, and rais'd frame of woe and frailtie
The bond, and bundle of corruption;
A quick corse, onely sensible of griefe,
A walking sepulcher, or household thiefe:
A glasse of ayre, broken with lesse then breath,
A slaue bound face to face, to death, til death:
And what sayd all you more? I know, besides
That life is but a darke and stormy night,
Of sencelesse dreames, terrors, and broken sleepes;
A Tyranie, deuising paines to plague
And make man long in dying, racks his death;
And death is nothing, what can you say more?
I bring a long Globe, and a little earth,
Am seated like earth betwixt both the heauens:
That if I rise; to heauen I rise; if fall
I likewise fall to heauen; what stronger faith,
Hath any of your soules? what say you more?
Why lose I time in these things? talke of knowledge,
It serues for inward vse. I will not die
Like to a Clergie man; but like the Captaine,
That prayd on horse-back and with sword in hand,
Threatend the Sunne, commanding it to stand;
These are but ropes of sand.
Desire you then,
To speake with any man?
I would speake with La Force, and Saint Blancart.
Do they flie me?
Where is Preuost, controwler of my house?
Gone to his house ith countrie three daies since.
He should haue stayd here, he keepes all my blancks.
O all the world forsakes me! wretched world,
Consisting most of parts, that flie each other:
A firmnesse, breeding all inconstancy,
A bond of all disiunction; like a man
Long buried, is a man that long hath liu'd;
Touch him, he falls to ashes; for one fault,
I forfeite all the fashion of a man;
Why should I keepe my soule in this dark light?
Whose black beames lighted me to loose my selfe.
When I haue lost my armes, my fame, my winde,
Friends, brother, hopes, fortunes, and euen my furie?
O happie were the man, could liue alone,
To know no man, nor be of any knowne!
My Lord, it is the manner once againe
To read the sentence?
Yet more sentences?
How often will yee make me suffer death?
As yee were proud to heare your powreful domes?
I know and feele you were the men that gaue it,
And die most cruellie to heare so often
My crimes and bitter condemnation vrdg'd:
Suffize it, I am brought here; and obey,
And that all here are priuie to the crimes.
It must be read my Lord, no remedie.
Reade, if it must be, then, and I must talke.
The processe being extraordinarily made and examin'd by the Court, 
and chambers assembled—
Condemn'd for depositions of a witch?
The common deposition, and her whoore
To all whorish periuries and treacheries.
Sure he cal'd vp the diuill in my spirits,
And made him to vsurpe my faculties:
Shall I be cast away now he's cast out?
What Iustice is in this? deare countrey-men,
Take this true euidence, betwixt heauen and you,
And quit me in your hearts.
Go on.
Against Charles Gontaut of Byron: knight of both the orders; Duke of Byron, 
peere and marshall of France; Gouernor of Burgondy, 
accus'd of treason in a sentence was giuen the 22. of this month, 
condemning the said Duke of Byron of heigh treason, 
for his direct conspiracies against the kings person; enterprises against his state.—
That is most false; let me for euer be,
Depriued of heauen, as I shall be of earth,
If it be true: knowe worthy country-men.
These two and twenty moneths I haue bene clere,
Of all atempts against the king and state.
Treaties and trecheries with his Enemies, being marshall of the Kings army, 
for reparation of which crimes they depriued him of all his estates, honors and dignities, 
and condemned him to lose his head vpon a Scaffold at the Greaue
The Greaue? had that place stood for my dispatch
I had not yeelded; all your forces should not,
Stire me one foote; wild horses should haue drawne,
My body peece-meale, ere you all had brought me.
Declaring all his goods moueable and inmoueable whatsoeuer to be confiscate to the King: 
the Signeury of Byron to loose the title of Duchy and Peere for euer.
Now is your forme contented,
I my Lord
And I must now entreat you to deliuer,
Your order vp, the king demands it of you.
And I restore it, with my vow of safty,
In that world, where both he and I are one,
I neuer brake the oth I tooke to take it,
We'l now my Lord wee'l take our latest leaues,
Beseeching heauen to take as clere from you,
All sence of torment in your willing death:
All loue and thought of what you must leaue here,
As when you shall aspire-heauens highest sphere.
Thankes to your Lordship and let me pray to,
That you will hold good censure of my life,
By the cleere witnesse of my soule in death,
That I haue neuer past act gainst the King,
Which if my faith had let me vndertake,
They had bene three yeares since, amongst the dead;
Your soule shall finde his safety in her owne,
Call the executioner!
Good sir I pray,
Go after and beseech the Chancellor
That he will let my body be interrd,
Amongst my predecessors at Byron:
I go my Lord:
Go, go! can all go thus,
And no man come with comfort? farewell world:
He is at no end of his actions blest,
Whose ends will make him greatest, and not best;
They tread no ground, but ride in ayre on stormes,
That follow State, and hunt their empty formes;
Who see not that the Valleys of the world,
Make euen right with the Mountains, that they grow
Greene, and lye warmer; and euer peacefull are,
When Clowdes spit fire as Hilles, and burne them bare?
Not Valleys part, but we should imitate Streames,
That run below the Valleys, and do yeeld
To euery Mole-hill; euery Banke imbrace
That checks their Currants; and when Torrents come,
That swell and raise them past their naturall height,
How madd they are, and trubl'd? like low straines
With Torrents crownd, are men with Diademes;
My Lord tis late; wilt please you to go vp?
Vp? tis a faire preferment, ha ha ha,
There should go showtes to vp-shots; not a breath
Of any mercy, yet? come, since we must;
Whose this?
The executioner, my Lord;
Death, slaue, downe, or by the blood that moues me
Ile plucke thy throat out; goe, Ile call you straight,
Hold boy; and this,
Soft boy ile barre you that
Take this then, yet I pray thee, that againe
I do not ioy in sight of such a Pageant
As presents death; Though this life haue a cursse;
Tis better then another, that is worse;
My Lord, now you are blinde to this worlds sight,
Looke vpward to a world of endles light;
I, I, you talke of vpward still to others,
And downwards looke with headlong eyes your selues.
Now come you vp sir; But not touch me yet;
Where shall I be now?
Heere my Lord;
Wheres that?
There, there, my Lord;
And where, slaue, is that there?
Thou seest I see not? yet speake as I saw;
Well, now ist fit?
Kneele, I beseech your Grace,
That I may do mine office with most order;
Do it, and if at one blow thou art short,
Giue one and thirty, Ile indure them all.
Hold; stay a little; comes there yet no mercy?
High Heauen curse these exemplarie proceedings,
When Iustice failes, they sacrifize our example;
Let me beseech you, I may cut your haire;
Out vgly Image of my cruell Iustice;
Yet wilt thou be before me, stay my will,
Or by the will of Heauen Ile strangle thee;
My Lord you make too much of this your body,
Which is no more your owne;
Nor is it yours;
Ile take my death, with all the horride rites
And representments, of the dread it merits;
Let tame Nobilitie, and nummed fooles
That apprehend not what they vndergo,
Be such exemplarie, and formall sheepe;
I will not haue him touch me, till I will;
If you will needs racke me beyond my reason,
Hell take me, but Ile strangle halfe thats here,
And force the rest to kill me! Ile leape downe
If but once more they tempt me to dispaire;
You wish my quiet, yet giue cause of fury:
Thinke you to set rude windes vpon the Sea,
Yet keepe it calme? or cast me in a sleepe,
With shaking of my chaines about myne eares?
O honest Soldiers, you haue seene me free,
From any care, of many thousand deathes!
Yet, of this one, the manner doth amaze me.
View, view, this wounded bosome, how much bound
Should that man make me, that would shoote it through;
Is it not pitty I should lose my life,
By such a bloody and infamous stroake?
Now by thy spirit, and thy better Angell,
If thou wert cleere, the Continent of France,
Would shrinke beneath the burthen of thy death,
Ere it would beare it;
Whose that?
I say well:
And cleere your Iustice, here is no ground shrinks,
If he were cleere it would: And I say more,
Clere, or not cleere, If he with all his foulenesse,
Stood here in one Skale, and the Kings chiefe Mynion,
Stood in another, here: Put here a pardon,
Here lay a royall gift, this, this, in merit,
Should hoyse the other Mynion into ayre:
Hence with that franticke:
This is some poore witnes
That my desert, might haue out-weighed my forfeyt:
But danger, hauntes desert, when he is Greatest;
His hearty ills, are prou'd out of his glaunces,
And Kings suspicions, needes no Ballances;
So her's a most decreetall end of me:
VVhich I desire, in me, may end my wrongs;
Commend my loue, I charge you, to my brothers,
And by my loue and misery command them,
To keepe their faiths that bind them to the King,
And proue no stomakers of my misfortunes;
Nor come to Court, till time hath eaten out,
The blots, and skarres of my opprobrious death;
And tell the Earle, my deare friend of D'Auergne,
That my death vtterly were free from griefe,
But for the sad losse of his worthy friendship;
And if I had beene made for longer life,
I would haue more deseru'd him in my seruice,
Beseeching him to know I haue not vsde
One word in my arraignement that might touch him,
Had I no other want then so ill meaning:
And so farewell for euer: neuer more
Shall any hope of my reuiuall see mee;
Such is the endlesse exile of dead men.
Summer succeeds the spring; Autumne the Summer,
The Frosts of Winter, the falne leaues of Autumne:
All these, and all fruites in them yearely fade,
And euery yeare returne: but cursed man,
Shall neuer more renew his vanisht face;
Fall on your knees, then Statists ere yee fall,
That you may rise againe: knees bent too late,
Stick you in earth like statues: see in me
How you are powr'd downe from your cleerest heauens;
Fall lower yet: mixt with th' vnmoued center,
That your owne shadowes may no longer mocke yee.
Stricke, stricke, O stricke;
Flie, flie commanding soule,
And on thy wings for this thy bodies breath,
Beare the eternall victory of death.