I saw my Nephew Charlemont but now
Part from his Father. Tell him I desire
To speak with him.
Borachio, thou art read
In Nature and her large Philosophie.
Obseru'st thou not the very selfe same course
Of reuolution both in Man and Beast?
The same. For birth, growth, state, decay and death:
Onely, a Man's beholding to his Nature
For th'better composition o'the two.
But where that fauour of his Nature is
Not full and free; you see a man becomes
A foole, as little-knowing as a beast.
That showes there's nothing in a Man aboue
His nature; if there were, consid'ring t'is
His beings excellencie, t'would not yeeld
To Natures weakenesse.
Then if Death casts vp
Our totall summe of ioy and happinesse;
Let me haue all my sences feasted in
Th'abundant fulnesse of delight at once,
And with a sweet insensible increase
Of pleasing surfet melt into my dust.
That reuolution is too short me thinkes.
If this life comprehends our happinesse,
How foolish to desire to dye so soone?
And if our time runnes home vnto the length
Of Nature, how improuident it were
To spend our substance on a minutes pleasure,
And after liue an age in miserie?
So thou conclud'st that pleasure onely flowes
Vpon the streame of riches.
Wealth is Lord
Of all felicitie.
T'is Oracle.
For what's a man that's honest without wealth?
Both miserable and contemptible.
Hee's worse Borachio. For if Charitie
Be an essentiall part of Honestie,
And should be practis'd first vpon our selues;
Which must be graunted; then your honest man
That's poore, is most dishonest, for hee is
Vncharitable to the Man, whom hee
Should most respect. But what doth this touch me,
That seeme to haue enough? Thankes industrie.
T'is true. Had not my Body spredde it selfe
Into posteritie; perhaps I should
Desire no more increase of substance, then
Would hold proportion with mine owne dimentions.
Yet euen in that sufficiencie of state,
A man has reason to prouide and adde.
For what is he hath such a present eye,
And so prepar'd a strength; that can fore-see,
And fortifie his substance and himselfe,
Against those accidents, the least whereof
May robbe him of an ages husbandry?
And for my children; they are as neere to me,
As branches to the tree whereon they grow;
And may as numerously be multiplied.
As they increase, so should my prouidence;
For from my substance they receiue the sap,
Whereby they liue and flowrish.
Sir enough,
I vnderstand the marke whereat you aime.
Silence. Ware interrupted. Charlemont!
Good morrow Vncle.
Noble Charlemont;
Good morrow. Is not this the honour'd day
You purpos'd to set forward to the warre?
My inclination did intend it so.
And not your resolution?
Yes my Lord;
Had not my Father contradicted it.
O noble warre! Thou first originall
Of all man's honour. How deiectedly
The baser Spirit of our present time
Hath cast it selfe below the ancient worth
Of our forefathers! From whose noble deedes
Ignobly we deriue our pedigrees.
Sir, taxe not me for his vnwillingnesse.
By the command of his authoritie,
My disposition's forc'd against it selfe.
Nephew, you are the honour of our bloud.
The troope of Gentry, whose inferiour worth
Should second your example, are become
Your Leaders: and the scorne of their discourse,
Turnes smiling backe vpon your backewardnesse.
You neede not vrge my spirit by disgrace,
T'is free enough. My Father hinders it.
To curbe me, hee denyes me maintenance
To put me in the habite of my ranque.
Vnbinde me from that strong necessitie,
And call me Coward if I stay behind.
For want of meanes? Borachio! Where's the gold?
I'de disinherite my posteritie
To purchase honour. T'is an interest
I prize aboue the principall of wealth.
I'm glad I had th'occasion to make knowne
How readily my substance shall vnlocke
It selfe to serue you. Here's a thousand Crownes.
My worthy vncle; in exchange for this,
I leaue my bond. So I am doubly bound;
By that for the repayment of this gold,
And by this gold to satisfie your loue.
Sir; t'is a witnesse (onely) of my loue;
And loue doth alwayes satisfie it selfe.
Now to your Father; labour his consent.
My importunitie shall second yours.
Wee will obtaine it.
If intreatie faile,
The force of reputation shall preuaile.
Goe call my Sonnes, that they may take their leaues
Of noble Charlemont. Now my Borachio!
The substance of our former argument
Was wealth.
The question how to compasse it.
Young Charlemont is going to the warre.
O, thou begin'st to take me.
Marke me then.
Me thinkes, the pregnant wit of Man, might make
The happy absence of this Charlemont,
A subiect for commodious prouidence.
He has a wealthy Father; ready eu'n
To drop into his graue. And no mans power
When Charlemont is gone, can interpose
'Twixt you and him.
Thou hast apprehended both
My meaning and my loue. Now let thy trust,
For vndertaking and for secrecie,
Hold measure with thy amplitude of wit;
And thy reward shall paralell thy worth.
My resolution has already bound
Mee to your seruice.
And my heart to thee.
Here are my Sonnes,
There's my eternitie. My life in them;
And their succession shall for euer liue.
And in my reason dwels the prouidence,
To adde to life as much of happinesse.
Let all men lose, so I increase my gaine,
I haue no feeling of anothers paine.
I prithee let this current of my teares,
Diuert thy inclination from the warre.
For of my children thou are onely left,
To promise a succession to my house.
And all the honour thou canst get by armes,
Will giue but vaine addition to thy name;
Since from thy auncestours thou dost deriue
A dignitie sufficient; and as great
As thou hast substance to maintaine and beare.
I prithee stay at home.
My noble Father.
The weakest sigh you breath, hath power to turne
My strongest purpose; and your softest teare
To melt my resolution to as soft
Obedience. But my affection to the warre,
Is as heriditary as my bloud
To eu'ry life of all my ancestry.
Your predecessours were your presidents;
And you are my example. Shall I serue
For nothing but a vaine Parenthesis,
I'th'honour'd story of your Familie?
Or hang but like an emptie Scutcheon,
Betweene the trophee's of my predecessours.
And the rich Armes of my posteritie?
There's not a French-man of good bloud and youth,
But eyther out of spirit or example,
Is turn'd a Souldier. Onely Charlemont
Must be reputed that same heartlesse thing,
That Cowards will be bold to play vpon.
Good morrow my Lord.
Morrow good brother.
Good morrow Vncle.
Morrow knide Nephew.
What? ha'you wash'd your eyes wi'teares this morning?
Come: by my soule, his purpose does deserue
Your free consent. Your tendernesse disswades him.
What to the Father of a Gentleman,
Should be more tender then the maintenance
And the increase of honour to his house?
My Lord; here are my Boyes. I should be proud
That eyther this were able, or that inclin'd
To be my Nephewes braue competitor.
Your importunities haue ouercome.
Pray God my forc'd graunt proue not ominous.
We haue obtain'd it.—Ominous? in what?
It cannot be in anything but death.
And I am of a confident beliefe,
That eu'n the time, place, manner of our deathes,
Doe follow Fate with that necessitie
That makes vs sure to dye. And in a thing
Ordain'd so certainly vnalterable,
What can the vse of prouidence preuaile?
Morrow my Lord Montferrers, Lord D'amville.
Good morrow Gentlemen. Couzen Charlemont!
Kindly good morrow. Troth, I was afeard
I should ha come too late, to tell you that
I wish your vndertakings a successe
That may deserue the measure of their worth.
My Lord; my dutie would not let me goe,
Without receiuing your commandements.
Accomplements are more for ornament,
Then vse. Wee should imploy no time in them,
But what our serious businesse will admit.
Your fauour had by his duty beene preuented,
If we had not with-held him in the way.
Hee was o'comming to present his seruice.
But now no more. The Cooke inuites to breakfast.
Wilt please your Lordship enter.—Noble Lady.
My noble Mistresse! this accomplement
Is like an elegant and mouing speech,
Compos'd of many sweete perswasiue points,
Which second one onother, with a fluent
Increase, and confirmation of their force,
Reseruing still the best vntill the last,
To crowne the strong impulsion of the rest
With a full conquest of the hearers sense:
Because th'impression of the last we speake
Doth alwayes longest and most constantly
Possesse the entertainment of remembrance.
So all that now salute my taking leaue,
Haue added numerously to the loue,
Wherewith I did receiue their courtesie.
But you (deare Mistresse) being the last and best
That speakes my farewell; like th'imperious cloze
Of a most sweete Oration, wholy haue
Possess'd my liking, and shall euer liue
Within the soule of my true memory.
So (Mistresse) with this kisse I take my leaue.
My worthy Seruant! you mistake th'intent
Of kissing. T'was not meant to separate
A paire of Louers; but to be the seale
Of Loue; importing by the ioyning of
Our mutuall and incorporated breathes,
That we should breath but one contracted life.
Or stay at home, or let me goe with you.
My Castabella! for my selfe to stay,
Or you to goe, would either taxe my youth
With a dishonourable weakenesse, or
Your louing purpose with immodestie.
And for the satisfaction of your loue,
Heere comes a man whose knowledge I haue made
A witnesse to the contract of our vowes,
Which my returne by marriage shall confirme.
I salute you both with the spirit of copulation, 
already informed of your matrimoniall purposes, 
and will testimonie to the integritie.
O the sad trouble of my fearefull soule!
My faithfull seruant! did you neuer heare,
That when a certaine great man went to th'warre,
The louely face of heau'n was masqu'd with sorrow,
The sighing windes did moue the breast of earth,
The heauie cloudes hung downe their mourning heads,
And wept sad showers the day that hee went hence,
As if that day presag'd some ill successe,
That fatallie should kill his happinesse;
And so it came to passe. Me thinkes my eyes
(Sweet Heau'n forbid) are like those weeping cloudes,
And as their showers presag'd so doe my teares,
Some sad euent will follow my sad feares.
Fie, superstitious? is it bad to kisse?
May all my feares hurt me no more then this.
Fie, fie, fie, these carnall kisses doe stirre vp the Concupisences of the flesh.
O! heer's your daughter vnder her seruants lips.
Madame, there is no cause you should mistrust
The kisse I gaue, t'was but a parting one.
A lustie bloud! Now by the lip of Loue
Were I to choose, your ioyning one for mee.
Your Father stayes to bring you on the way.
Farewell. The great commander of the warre
Prosper the course you vndertake. Farewell.
My Lord! I humbly take my leaue—Madame!
I kisse your hand.—And your sweet lip.—Farewell.
Her power to speake is perish'd in her teares.
Something within me would perswade my stay,
But Reputation will not yeeld vnto 't.
Deare Sir, you are the man whose honest trust
My confidence hath chosen for my friend.
I feare my absence will discomfort her.
You haue the power and opportunitie
To moderate her passion. Let her griefe
Receiue that friendship from you; and your Loue
Shall not repent it selfe of courtesie.
Sir, I want words and protestation to insinuate into your credit; 
but in plainnesse and truth, I wil quallifie her griefe with the spirit of consolation.
Sir, I will take your friendship vp at vse.
And feare not that your profit shall be small;
Your interest shall exceede your principall.
Mounsieur Languebeau! Happily encountred. 
The honestie of your conuersation makes me request more int'rest in your familiaritie.
If your Lordship will be pleased to salute me without ceremonie, 
I shall be willing to exchange my seruice for your fauour; 
but this worshipping kinde of entertainment, is a superstitious vanitie; 
in plainnesse and truth I loue it not.
I embrace your disposition; and desire to giue you as liberall assurance of my loue, 
as my Lord Belforest your deserued fauourer.
His Lordship is pleased with my plainnesse and truth of conuersation.
It cannot displease him. In the behauiour of his noble daughter Castabella
a man may read her worth and your instruction.
That Gentlewoman is most sweetly modest, faire, honest, handsome, 
wise, well-borne, and rich.
You haue giuen me her picture in small.
Shee's like your Dyamond; a temptation in euery mans eye, 
yet not yeelding to any light impression her selfe.
The praise is hers; but the comparison your owne.
You shall forgiue me that, Sir.
I will not doe so much at your request as forgiue you it. 
I will onely giue you it Sir. By—You will make mee sweare.
O! by no meanes. Prophane not your lippes with the foulnesse of that sinne. 
I will rather take it. 
To saue your oath, you shall lose your Ring.
—Verily my Lord; my praise came short of her worth. Shee exceedes a Iewell. 
This is but onely for ornament; Shee both for ornament and vse.
Yet vnprofitably kept without vse. Shee deserues a worthy Husband, Sir. 
I haue often wish'd a match betweene my elder Sonne and her. 
The marriage would ioyne the houses of Belforest and Damville into a noble alliance.
And the vnitie of Families is a worke of loue and charitie.
And that worke an imployment well becomming the goodnesse of your disposition.
If your Lordship please to impose it vpon mee; 
I will carry it without any second end, the surest way to satisfie your wish.
Most ioyfully accepted.—Rousard! 
Here are Letters to my Lord Belforest touching my desire to that purpose. Rousard!
I send you a suitor to Castabella. To this Gentlemans discretion 
I commit the managing of your suite 
His good successe shall be most thankefull to your trust. 
Follow his instructions, he will be your leader.
In plainnesse and truth.
My leader? does your Lordship thinke mee too weake to giue the on-set my selfe.
I will onely assist your proceedings.
To say true, so I thinke you had neede, for a sicke man 
can hardly get a womans good will without help.
Charlemont! thy gratuitie and my promises were both but words; 
and both like words shall vanish into ayre.
—For thy poore empty hand I must be mute:
This giues mee feeling of a better suite.
Borachio! didst precisely note this man?
His owne profession would report him pure.
And seemes to know if any benefit
Arises of religion after death;
Yet but compare's profession with his life;
They so directly contradict themselues,
As if the end of his instructions were
But to diuert the world from sinne, that hee
More easily might ingrosse it to himselfe.
By that I am confirm'd an Atheist.
Well! Charlemont is gone. And here thou seest,
His absence the foundation of my plot.
Hee is the man whom Castabella loues.
That was the reason I propounded him
Employment fix'd vpon a forraine place,
To draw his inclination out o'th'way.
T'has left the passage of our practise free.
This Castabella is a wealthy heire,
And by her marriage with my elder Sonne;
My house is honour'd, and my state increas'd.
This worke alone deserues my industry:
But if it prosper, thou shalt see my braine
Make this but an induction to a point
So full of profitable policie;
That it would make the soule of honestie
Ambitious to turne villaine.
I bespeake
Employment in't. I'le be an instrument
To grace performance with dexteritie.
Thou shalt. No man shall rob thee of the honour.
Goe presently and buy a crimson Scarfe,
Like Charlemonts. Prepare thee a disguise,
I'th'habite of a Souldiour, hurt and lame;
And then be ready at the wedding feast,
Where thou shalt haue imployment in a worke
Will please thy disposition.
As I vow'd;
Your instrument shall make your proiect proud.
This marriage will bring wealth. If that succeede,
I will increase it though my Brother bleed.
Nay good Sir; in troth if you knew how little it pleases mee, you would forbeare it.
I will not leaue thee, till th'ast entertain'd mee for thy seruant.
My seruant? You are sicke you say. You would taxe mee 
of indiscretion to entertaine one that is not able to doe me seruice.
The seruice of a Gentlewoman consists most in chamber worke, 
and sicke men are fittest for the chamber. I prithee giue me a fauour.
Mee thinkes you haue a very sweet fauour of your owne.
I lacke but your blacke eye.
If you goe to buffets among the Boyes, they'l giue you one.
Nay if you grow bitter, Ile dispraise your blacke eye. 
The gray eie'd Morning makes the fairest day.
Now that you dissemble not, I could be willing to giue you a fauour. 
What fauour would you haue?
Any toy: any light thing.
Fie. Will you be so vnciuill to aske a light thing at a Gentlewomans hand?
Wilt giue mee a bracelet o'thy haire then?
Doe you want haire Sir?
No faith Ile want no haire, so long as I can haue it for mony.
What would you doe with my haire then?
Weare it for thy sake sweet hart.
Doe you thinke I loue to haue my haire worne off?
Come you are so witty now, and so sensible.
Tush. I would I wanted one o'my sences now.
Bitter againe? What's that? Smelling?
No, no, no. Why now y'are satisfied I hope. I haue giuen you a fauour.
What fauour? a kisse? I prithee giue mee another.
Shew mee that I gaue you then.
How should I shew it?
You are vnworthie of a fauour if you will not bestow the keeping of it one minute.
Well in plaine termes, doest loue mee? That's the purpose of my comming.
Loue you? Yes Very well.
Giue mee thy hand vpon't.
Nay, you mistake mee. If I loue you very well, I must not loue you now. 
For now your are not very well, y'are sicke.
This Equiuocation is for the iest now.
I speak't as t'is now in fashion, in earnest. But I shall not be in quiet for you, 
I perceiue, till I haue giuen you a fauour. Doe you loue mee?
With all my hart.
Then with all my hart, Ile giue you a Iewell to hang in your eare,
—Harke yee—I can neuer loue you.
Call you this a Iewell to hang in mine eare? 
T'is no light fauour, for Ile be sworne it comes somewhat heauily to mee. 
Well. I will not leaue her for all this. Mee thinkes it animates a man 
to stand too't, when a woman desires to be rid of him at the first sight.
I entertaine the offer of this match;
With purpose to confirme it presently.
I haue already moou'd it to my daughter;
Her soft excuses sauour'd at the first
(Me thought) but of a modest innocence
Of bloud; whose vnmoou'd streame was neuer drawne
Into the current of affection. But when I
Replyed with more familiar arguments,
Thinking to make her apprehension bold;
Her modest blush fell to a pale dislike,
And shee refus'd it with such confidence,
As if shee had beene prompted by a loue
Inclining firmely to some other man,
And in that obstinacie shee remaines.
Verily that disobedience doth not become a Childe. It proceedeth from an 
vnsanctified libertie. You will be accessarie to your owne dishonour if you suffer it.
Your honest wisedome has aduis'd mee well.
Once more Ile moue her by perswasiue meanes.
If shee resist; all mildenesse set apart,
I will make vse of my authoritie.
And instantly, least fearing your constraint; 
her contrary affection teach her some deuise that may preuent you.
To cut off eu'ry opportunitie,
Procrastination may assist her with;
This instant night shee shall be marryed.
Best.
Please it your Lordship, my mother attends
I'th' Gallerie, and desires your conference.
This meanes I vs'd to bring mee to your eare.
Time cuts off circumstance; I must be briefe.
To your integritie did Charlemont
Commit the contract of his loue and mine.
Which now so strong a hand seekes to diuide:
That if your graue aduise assist me not,
I shall be forc'd to violate my faith.
Since Charlemont's absence, I haue waighed his loue with 
the spirit of consideration; and in sinceritie 
I finde it to be friuolous and vaine. With-draw your respect; his affection deserueth it not.
Good sir; I know your heart cannot prophane
The holinesse you make profession of;
With such a vitious purpose, as to breake
The vow, your owne consent did help to make.
Can he deserue your loue, who in neglect of your delightfull conuersation
and in obstinate contempt of all your prayers and teares, absents himselfe so far from 
your sweet fellowship, and with a purpose so contracted to that absence, 
that you see hee purchases your separation with the hazard of his bloud and life; 
fearing to want pretence to part your companies?—T'is rather hate that doth diuision moue; 
Loue still desires the presence of his Loue.—Verily, hee is not of the Familie of Loue.
O doe not wrong him. T'is a generous minde
That ledde his disposition to the warre:
For gentle loue and noble courage are
So neare allyed; that one begets another:
Or, Loue is Sister, and Courage is the Brother.
Could I affect him better then before,
His Souldiers heart would make me loue him more.
But Castabella.—
Tush, you mistake the way into a woman,
The passage lyes not through her reason, but her bloud.
Nay, stay! How wouldst thou call the childe,
That being rais'd with cost and tendernesse,
To full habilitie of body and meanes;
Denies reliefe vnto the parents, who
Bestow'd that bringing vp?
Vnnaturall.
Then Castabella is vnnaturall.
Nature the louing mother of vs all,
Brought forth a woman for her owne reliefe,
By generation to reuiue her age.
Which, now thou hast habilitie and meanes
Presented, most vnkindly dost deny.
Belieue me Mother; I doe loue a man.
Preferr'st th' affection of an absent Loue,
Before the sweet possession of a man;
The barren minde before the fruitfull body;
Where our creation has no reference
To man, but in his body: being made
Onely for generation; which (vnlesse
Our children can be gotten by conceit)
Must from the body come. If Reason were
Our counsellour, wee would neglect the worke
Of generation, for the prodigall
Expence it drawes vs to of that which is
The wealth of life. Wise Nature (therefore) hath
Reseru'd for an inducement to our sence,
Our greatest pleasure in that greatest worke.
Which being offer'd thee; thy ignorance
Refuses, for th'imaginarie ioy
Of an vnsatisfied affection, to
An absent man Whose bloud once spent i'th'warre;
Then hee'l come home, sicke, lame and impotent;
And wed thee to a torment; like the paine
Of Tantalus, continuing thy desire,
With fruitlesse presentation of the thing
It loues; still moou'd, and still vnsatisfied.
Now Leuidulcia! Hast thou yet prepar'd
My Daughters loue to entertaine this Man?
Her husband here?
I'm but her mother i'law;
Yet if shee were my very flesh and bloud,
I could aduise no better for good.
Sweet wife! Thy ioyfull husband thus salutes Thy cheeke.
My husband? O! I am betraid.—
Deare friend of Charlemont! your puritie
Professes a diuine contempt o'th'world;
O be not brib'd by that you so neglect,
In being the worlds hated instrument,
To bring a iust neglect vpon your selfe!—
Deare Father! let me but examine my
Affection.—Sir, your prudent iudgement can
Perswade your sonne that t'is improuident
To marry one whose disposition, he
Did ne'er obserue.—Good sir, I may be of
A nature so vnpleasing to your minde;
Perhaps you'l curse the fatall houre wherein
You rashly marryed me.
My Lord Belforest!
I would not haue her forc'd against her choise.
Passion o'me thou peeuish girle. I charge
Thee by my blessing, and th'authoritie
I haue to claime th'obedience; marry him.
Now Charlemont! O my presaging teares!
This sad euent hath follow'd my sad feares.
A rape, a rape, a rape!
How now?
What's that?
Why, what is't but a Rape to force a wench to marry, 
since it forces her to lie with him she would not?
Verily, his Tongue is an vnsanctified member.
Verily, your grauitie becomes your perish'd soule, 
as hoary mouldinesse does rotten fruit.
Couzen, y'are both vnciuill and prophane.
Thou disobedient villaine; get thee out of my sight. 
Now by my Soule Ile plague thee for this rudenesse.
Come; set forward to the Church.
And verifie the Prouerbe. The nearer the Church; the further from God.
—Poore wench. For thy sake, may his habilitie die in his appetite; that thou 
beest not troubled  with him thou louest not. May his appetite moue thy desire to 
another man: so hee shall helpe to make himselfe Cuckold. And let that man be one 
that he payes wages too: so thou shalt profit by him thou hatest. Let the Chambers 
be matted, the hinges oyl'd, the curtaine rings silenced, and the chamber-maid hold 
her peace at his owne request, that he may sleepe the quietlier. And in that sleepe 
let him be soundly cuckolded. And when hee knowes it, and seekes to sue a diuorce; 
let him haue no other satisfaction then this: Hee lay by and slept: 
the Law will take no hold of her, because he wink'd at it.
MIstresse Cataplasma! I expected you an houre since.
Certaine Ladies at my house (Madame) detain'd mee; 
otherwise I had attended your Ladiship sooner.
Wee are beholding to you for youR companie. My Lord; 
I pray you bid these Gentlewomen welcome: th'are my inuited friends.
Gentlewomen, y'are welcome, pray sit downe.
Frisco! by my Lord D'amville's leaue I prithee goe into the Buttry. Thou sha't finde 
some o'my men there; if they bid thee not welcome, they are very Loggerheads.
If your Logger heads will not, your Hoggesheads shall Madame, if I get into the Buttry.
That fellowes disposition to mirth should be our present example. 
Let's be graue and meditate, when our affaires require our seriousnes. 
T'is out of season to be heauily disposed.
We should be all wound vp into the key of Mirth.
The Musicke there.
Where's my Lord Montferrers? Tell him here's a roome attends him.
Heauen giue your marriage that I am depriu'd of, ioy.
My Lord Belforest! Castabella's health. 
Set ope' the Sellar dores, and let this health goe freely round the house.
—Another to your Sonne, my Lord; To noble Charlemont. Hee is a Souldier. 
Let the Instruments of warre congratulate his memorie.—
My Lord, here's one i'th'habite of a Souldier saies hee is newly 
return'd from Ostend, and has some businesse of import to speake.
Ostend! let him come in. My soule fore-tels hee brings the newes will make our 
Musicke full. My brothers ioy would doe't: and here comes hee will raise it.
O my spirit, it does disswade my tongue to question him, 
as if it knew his answere would displease.
Souldier! what newes? wee heard a rumour of a blow you gaue the enemie.
T'is very true my Lord.
Canst thou relate it.
Yes.
I Prithee doe.
The enemie, defeated of a faire
Aduantage by a flattring stratagem;
Plants all th' Artillerie against the Towne.
Whose thunder and lightning made our bulwarkes shake;
And threatned in that terrible report,
The storme wherewith they meant to second it.
Th'assault was generall. But for the place
That promis'd most aduantage to beforc'd;
The pride of all their Army was drawne forth,
And equally diuided into Front,
And Rere. They march'd. And comming to a stand,
Ready to passe our Channell at an ebbe,
We aduis'd it for our safest course, to draw
Our sluices vp and mak't vnpassable.
Our Gouernour oppos'd; and suffered'em
To charge vs home e'en to the Rampiers foot.
But when their front was forcing vp our breach,
At push o'pike, then did his pollicie
Let goe the sluices, and trip'd vp the heeles
Of the whole bodie of their troupe, that stood
Within the violent current of the streame.
Their front beleaguer'd twixt the water and
The Towne; seeing the floud was growne too deepe,
To promise them a safe retreate; expos'd
The force of all their spirits, (like the last
Expiring gaspe of a strong harted man)
Vpon the hazard of one charge; but were
Oppress'd and fell. The rest that could not swimme,
Were onely drown'd; but those that thought to scape
By swimming, were by murtherers that flanked,
The leuell of the floud both drow'nd and slaine.
Now by my soule (Souldier) a braue seruice.
O what became of my deare Charlemont?
Walking next day vpon the fatall shore,
Among the slaughter'd bodies of their men,
Which the full-stomack'd Sea had cast vpon
The sands, it was m'vnhappy chance to light
Vpon a face, whose fauour when it liu'd
My astonish'd minde inform'd me I had seene.
Hee lay in's Armour; as if that had beene
His Coffine, and the weeping Sea (like one
Whose milder temper doth lament the death
Of him whom in his rage he slew) runnes vp
The Shoare; embraces him; kisses his cheeke,
Goes backe againe and forces vp the Sandes
To burie him; and eu'rie time it parts,
Sheds teares vpon him; till at last (as if
It could no longer endure to see the man
Whom it had slaine, yet loath to leaue him;) with
A kinde of vnresolu'd vnwilling pace,
Winding her waues one in another, like
A man that foldes his armes, or wrings his hands
For griefe; ebb'd from the body and descends:
As if it would sinke downe into the earth,
And hide it selfe for shame of such a deede.
And Souldier; who was this?
O Charlemont!
Your feare hath told you that whereof my griefe
Was loath to be the messenger.
O God.
Charlemont drown'd? Why how could that be? 
since it was the aduerse partie that receiued the ouerthrow.
His forward spirit press'd into the front;
And being engag'd within the enemie,
When they retreated through the rising streame;
I'the violent confusion of the throng
Was ouerborne and perish'd in the floud.
And here's the sad remembrance of his life,—The Scarfe.
Which for his sake I will for euer weare.
Torment me not with witnesses of that,
Which I desire, not to beleeue; yet must.
Thou art a Scrichowle; and dost come i'night
To be the cursed messenger of death.
Away. Depart my house; or (by my soule)
You'l finde me a more fatall enemie,
Then euer was Ostend. Be gone. Dispatch.
Sir t'was my loue.
Your loue to vexe my heart with that I hate?
Harke, doe you heare? you, knaue?—
O th'art a most delicate sweete eloquent villaine!
Was't not well counterfaited?
Rarely.—Be gone. I will not here reply.
Why then farewell. I will not trouble you.
So. The foundation's laid. Now by degrees,
The worke will rise and soone be perfected.
O this vncertaine state of mortall man!
What then? it is th'ineuitable fate
Of all things vnderneath the Moone.
T'is true.
Brother, for healths sake ouercome your griefe.
I cannot sir. I am vncapable
Of comfort. My turne will be next. I feele
My selfe not well.
You yeeld too much to griefe.
All men are mortall. The houre of death is vncertaine. 
Age makes sicknesse the more dangerous. And griefe is subiect to distraction. 
You know not how soone you may be depriu'd of the benefit of sense. 
In my vnderstanding (therefore) you shall doe well 
if you be sicke to set your state in present order. Make your Will.
I haue my wish.—Lights for my Borther.
Ile withdraw a while;
And craue the honest counsell of this man.
With all my heart. I pray attend him sir.
This next roome please your Lordship.
Where you will.
My Daughter's gone. Come Sonne. Mistresse Cataplasma, come; wee'l vp into her 
chamber. I'de faine see how she entertaines the expectation of her husbands bedfellowship.
Faith howsoeuer shee entertaines it; I shall hardly please her; therefore let her rest.
Nay, please her hardly and you please her best.
Boy! fill some drinke, Boy.
Enough good Sir; not a drop more by this light.
Not by this light? Why then put out the candles and 
wee'l drinke i'the darke and t'wut old Boy.
No, no, no, no, no.
Why then take thy liquour. A health Fresco.
Your health will make me sicke sir.
Then t'will bring you o'your knees I hope sir.
May I not stand and pledge it sir?
I hope you will doe as wee doe.
Nay then indeed I must not stand, for you cannot.
Well said old boy.
Old boy, you'l make me a young childe anon: 
for if I continue this, I shall scarce be able to goe alone.
My body is as weake as water, Fresco.
Good reason sir, the beere has sent all the malt vp into your braine,
and left nothing but the water in your body.
Borachio! seest those fellowes?
Yes my Lord.
Their drunkennesse that seemes ridiculous,
Shall be a serious instrument, to bring
Our sober purposes to their successe.
I am prepar'd for th'execution, sir.
Cast off this habite, and about it straight.
Let them drinke healthes, & drowne their braines i'the floud; 
Ile promise them they shall be pledg'd in bloud.
You ha'left a damnable snuffe here.
Doe you take that in snuffe Sir?
You are a damnable rogue then.—
Fortune, I honour thee. My plot still rises, According to the modell of mine owne 
desires.— Lights for my Brother.—What ha'you drunke your selues mad you knaues.
My Lord the Iackes abus'd mee.
I thinke they are the Iackes indeed that haue abus'd thee, Dost heare? 
that fellow is a proud knaue. Hee has abus'd thee. As thou goest ouer the fields by 
and by, in lighting my brother home, Ile tell thee what'sha't doe. 
Knocke him ouer the pate with thy torch, Ile beare thee out in't.
I will sindge the goose by this torch.
Doest heare; fellow. Seest thou that proud knaue, I haue giuen him a lesson for his 
sawcinesse. H'as wrong'd thee. Ile tell thee what'sha't doe: As we goe ouer the fields by 
and by, clap him sodainely o'er the coxe-combe with thy torch, Ile beare thee out in't.
I will make him vnderstand as much.
Now Mounsieur Snuffe! What has my brother done?
Made his Will; and by that Will made you his heyre; with this prouiso, that 
as occasion shall hereafter moue him; hee may reuoke or alter it when he pleases.
Yes. Let him if he can.—Ile make it sure from his reuoking.
Brother, now good night.
The skie is darke, wee'l bring you o'er the fields;
Who can but strike, wants wisedome to maintaine:
Hee that strikes safe and sure, has heart and braine.
O Loue! thou chast affection of the Soule,
Without th'adultrate mixture of the bloud;
That vertue which to goodnesse addeth good:
The minion of heauens heart. Heauen! is't my fate
For louing that thou lou'st, to get thy hate,
Or was my Charlemont thy chosen Loue?
And therefore hast receiu'd him to thy selfe?
Then I confesse thy anger's not vniust.
I was thy riuall Yet to be diuorc'd
From loue, has beene a punishment enough.
(Sweete heauen) without being marryed vnto hate,
Hadst thou beene pleas'd: O double miserie!
Yet since thy pleasure hath inflicted it,
If not my heart, my dutie shall submit.
Mistresse Cataplasma, good night. I pray when your Man has brought you home, 
let him returne and light me to my house.
He shall instantly waite on your Ladiship.
Good Mistresse Cataplasma; for my seruants are all drunke; 
I cannot be beholding to'em for their attendance. 
O here's your Bride.
And melancholique too, me thinkes.
How can shee choose? your sicknesse will
Distaste th'expected sweetnesse o'the night.
That makes her heauie.
That should make her light.
Looke you to that.
What sweetnesse speake you of?
The sweetnesse of the night consists in rest.
With that sweetnesse thou shalt be surely blest,
Vnlesse my groning wake thee. Doe not moane.
Sh'ad rather you would wake, and make her grone.
Nay'troth sweete heart, I will not trouble thee.
Thou shalt not lose thy maiden-head too night.
O might that weakenesse euer be in force;
I neuer would desire to sue diuorce!
Wilt goe to bed.
I will attend you, Sir.
Mother, good night.
Pleasure be your bed-fellow.
Why sure their Generation was asleepe,
When shee begot those Dormice; that shee made
Them vp so weakely and imperfectly.
One wants desire; the tother habilitie.
When my affection euen with their cold blouds
(As snow rub'd through an actiue hand, does make
The flesh to burne) by agitation is
Inflam'd, I could vnbrace, and entertaine
The ayre to coole it.
That but mitigates
The heate; rather imbrace and entertaine
A younger brother; he can quench the fire.
Can you so, sir? now I beshrew your eare.
Why bold Sebastian, how dare you approach
So neare the presence of your displeas'd Father.
Vnder the protection of his present absence.
Belike you knew he was abroad then.
Yes.
Let me encounter you so; Ile perswade
Your meanes to reconcile me to his loue.
Is that the way? I vnderstand you not.
But for your reconcilement, meete m'at home;
Ile satisfie your suite
Within this halfe houre?
Or within this whole houre. When you will.— A lusty bloud! has both the presence 
and the spirit of a man. I like the freedome of his behauiour.—Ho—Sebastian! Gone?
—Has set my bloud o'boyling i'my veynes And now (like water pour'd vpon the ground, 
that mixes it selfe with eu'ry moysture it meetes) I could claspe with any man. 
O Fresco! Art thou come? If tother faile, then thou art entertaind.
Lust is a Spirit, which whosoe'er doth raise
The next man that encounters boldly, layes.
Such stones men vse to raise a house vpon;
But with these stones I goe to ruine one.
Passion o'me you drunken knaues: you'l put the lights out.
No my Lord; th'are but in ieast.
Mine's out.
Then light it at his head, that's light enough.— 
Foregod, th'are out. You drunken Rascals backe and light'em.
T'is exceeding darke.
No matter. I am acquainted with the way. Your hand. 
Let's easily walke. Ile lead you till they come.
My soule's opprest with griefe. T'lies heauie at my heart,.
O my departed Sonne! ere long I shall be with.
Marry God forbid.
O, o, o.
Now all the hoste of heauen forbid. Knaues, Rogues.
Pray God hee be not hurt! her's falne into the grauell pit.
Brother! deare Brother! Rascals, villaines, knaues. 
Eternall darkenesse damne you; come away. Goe round about into the grauell pit, 
and helpe my Brother vp. Why what a strange vnlucky night is this? Is't not my Lord? 
I thinke that Dogge that howl'd the newes of griefe, 
that fatall Scrichowle vsherd on this mischiefs.
Mischeife indeed my Lord. Your Brother's dead.
Hee's dead.
Hee's dead.
Dead be your tongues. Drop out mine eye-bals, and let enuious Fortune play 
at tennis with'em. Haue I liu'd to this? Malicious Nature! hadst thou borne me blinde; 
th'adst yet been something fauourable to me. No breath? No motion? 
prithee tell me heauen! hast shut thine eye to winke at murther; or hast put 
this sable garment on, to mourne at's death? Not one poore sparke in the whole spatious 
skye, of all that endlesse number would vouchsafe to shine? You vize-royes to 
the King of nature! whose constellations gouerne mortall births; where is that fatall 
Planet rul'd at his Natiuitie? That might ha'pleas'd to light him out, as well into th'world; 
vnlesse it be asham'd  T'haue beene the instrument of such a good mans cursed destinie.
Passions transports you. Recollect your selfe.
Lament him not. Whether our deaths be good
Or bad; it is not death but life that tryes;
Hee liu'd well, (therefore) questionlesse, well dyes.
I. Tis an easie thing for him that has no paine to talke of patience. 
Doe you thinke that Nature has no feeling?
Feeling? Yes. But has she purpos'd any thing for nothing? What good receiues 
this body by your griefe? Whether is't more vnnaturall not to grieue for him 
you cannot helpe with it; or hurt your selfe with grieuing and yet grieue in vaine?
Indeede had hee beene taken from mee like a piece o'dead flesh, 
I should neither ha' felt it, nor grieued for't. But come hether, 'pray looke heere. 
Behold the liuely tincture of his bloud! Neither the Dropsie nor the Iaundies in't. 
But the true freshnesse of a sanguine red; for all the fogge of this blacke murdrous night 
has mix'd with it. For any thing I know, hee might ha' liu'd till doomesday, 
and ha' done more good then either you or I. O Brother! He was a man of such 
a natiue goodnesse; as if Regeneration had beene giuen him in his mothers wombe. 
So harmeles, that rather then ha' trod vpon a worme, hee would ha' shun'd the way. 
So deerely pittifull, that e're the poore could aske his charity with dry eyes, 
hee gaue' em reliefe wi'teares—with teares—yes faith with teares.
Take vp the Corps. For wisedom's sake let reason fortifie this weakenesse.
Why what would you ha' mee doe? Foolish Nature will haue her course in spight 
o'wisedome. But I haue e'en done. All these wordes were but a great winde, 
and now this showre of teares has layd it, I am calme againe. 
You may set forward when you will. Ile follow you, like one that must and would not.
Our opposition will but trouble him.
The griefe that melts to teares, by it selfe is spent, 
Passion resisted, growes more violent.
Here's a sweete Comedie. T'begins with O dolentis, and concludes with ha, ha, he.
Ha, ha, he.
O my eccho! I could stand reuerberating this sweete musicall ayre of ioy, till I had perish'd 
my sound lungs with violent laughter. Lonely Night-Rauen! th'ast seaz'd a carkasse.
Put him out on's paine. I lay so fitly vnderneath the bancke from whence he fell; that e'er
his faltring tongue could vtter double Oo; I knock'd out's braines with this faire Rubie. 
And had another stone iust of this forme and bignesse ready: that I laid i'the broken skull 
vpo'the ground for's pillow; against the which they thought he fell and perish'd.
Vpon this ground Ile build my Manour-house;
And this shall be the chiefest corner stone.
T'has crown'd the most iudicious murder, that
The braine of man was e'er deliuer'd of.
I. Marke the plot. Not any circumstance
That stood within the reach of the designe,
Of persons, dispositions, matter, time or place,
But by this braine of mine, was made
An Instrumentall help; yet nothing from
Th'induction to th'accomplishment seem'd forc'd,
Or done o'purpose, but by accident.
First, my report that Charlemont was dead,
Though false; yet couer'd with a masque of truth.
I, and deliuer'd in as fit a time.
When all our mindes so wholy were possess'd
With one affaire, that no man would suspect
A thought imploi'd for any second end.
Then the Precisian to be ready, when
Your brother spake of death, to moue his Will.
His businesse cal'd him thither; and it fell
Within his office; vnrequested to't.
From him it came religiously; and sau'd
Our proiect from suspition: which if I
Had mou'd had beene endanger'd.
Then your healths.
Though seeming but the ordinarie rites,
And ceremonies due to festiuals:—
Yet vs'd by me to make the seruants drunke.
An instrument the plot could not haue miss'd.
T'was easie to set drunkards by the eares:
Th'ad nothing but their torches to fight with;
And when those lights were out;
Then darkenesse did
Protect the execution of the worke,
Both from preuention and discouerie.
Here was a murther brauely carryed, through
The eye of obseruation, vnobseru'd.
And those that saw the passage of it, made
The Instruments yet knew not what they did.
That power of rule Philosophers ascribe
To him they call the supreame of the Starres;
Making their influences gouernours
Of Sublunarie Creatures; when their selues
Are senselesse of their operations.
What! Doest start at thunder? Credit my beliefe, t'is a meere effect of nature. 
An exhalation hot and dry, inuolu'd within a watrie vapour i'the middle region of 
the ayre. Whose coldnesse congealing that thicke moysture to a cloud: 
the angry exhalation shut within a prison of contrary qualitie, striues to be free; and 
with the violent eruption through the grossenesse of that cloud; makes this noyse we heare.
T'is a fearefull noyse.
T'is a braue noyse. And mee thinkes graces our accomplishid proiect, as a peale 
of Ordnance does a triumph. It speakes encouragement. Now Nature showes thee 
how it sauour'd our performance; to forbeare this noyse when wee set forth, 
because it should not terrifie my brothers going home; which would haue dash'd 
our purpose: To forbeare this lightning in our passage, least it should ha'warn'd him 
o'the pitfall. Then propitious Nature winck'd at our proceedings;  
now it doth expresse, how that forbearance fauour'd our successe.
You haue confirm'd mee. For it followes well;
That Nature (since her selfe decay doth hate)
Should fauour those that strengthen their estate.
Our next endeauour is; since on the false report that Charlemont is dead, 
depends the fabrique of the worke; to credit that with all the countenance wee can.
Faith Sir, euen let his owne inheritance, whereof y'aue dispossess'd him, countenance 
the act. Spare so much out of that, to giue him a solemnitie of funerall. T'will quit 
the cost; and make your apprehension of his death appeare more confident and true.
Ile take thy counsell. Now farewell blacke night;
Thou beauteous Mistresse of a murderer:
To honour thee, that hast accomplish'd all;
Ile weare thy colours at his funerall.
Th'art welcome into my chamber; Fresco. Prithee shut the dore.
—Nay thou mistakest me. Come in and shut it.
T'is somewhat late Madame.
No matter. I haue somewhat to say to thee. What? 
is not thy mistresse towards a husband yet?
Faith Madame, shee has suitors. But they will not suite her me thinkes. 
They will not come off lustily it seemes.
They will not come on lustily, thou wouldst say.
I meane (Madame) they are not rich enough.
But I (Fresco) they are not bold enough. Thy Mistresse is of a liuely attractiue 
bloud, Fresco. And in troth shee's o'my minde for that. A poore spirit is poorer 
then a poore purse. Give me a fellow that brings not onely temptation with him, 
but has the actiuitie of wit, and audacitie of spirit to apply euery word and gesture 
of a womans speech and behauiour to his owne desire; and make her beleeue 
shee's the suitor her selfe. Neuer giue backe till he has made her yeeld to 'it.
Indeede among our equals Madame; but otherwise 
we shall be put horribly out o'countenance.
Thou art deceiu'd, Fresco. Ladyes are as coueteous as Yeomens wiues, and me 
thinkes they should be more gentle. Hot diet and soft ease makes em 
(like waxe alwaies kept warme) more easie to take impression.
—Prithee vntie my shooe. —What? art thou shamefac'd too? Goe roundly to worke man. 
My legge is not goutie: t'will endure the feeling, I warrant thee, Come hither, Fresco; 
thine eare.—S'daintie; I mistooke the place. I miss'd thine eare and hit thy lip.
Your Ladyship has made me blush.
That showes th'art full o'lustie bloud and thou knowest not how to vse it. 
Let mee see thy hand. Thou shouldst not be shamefac'd by thy hand, Fresco. 
Here's a brawny flesh and a hairy skinne: both signes of an able body. 
I doe not like these flegmaticke, smooth-skinn'd, soft-flesh'd fellowes. 
They are like candied Suckets, when they begin to perish; which I would alwayes emptie 
my Closet off, and giue'em my chamber-maid. —I haue some skill in Palmestry: 
by this line that stands directly against mee; thou shouldst be neare a good fortune. 
Fresco, if thou hadst the grace to entertaine it.
O what is that Madame? I pray!
No lesse then the loue of a faire Lady,
if thou doest not lose her with faint-heartednesse.
A Lady, Madame? alas a Lady is a great thing, I cannot compasse her.
No? Why? I am a Lady, Am I so great I cannot be compassed? Claspe my wast and try.
I could finde i'my heart Madame.
Vds body; my Husband! Faint-hearted foole! I thinke thou wert begotten betweene 
the North-pole, and the congeal'd passage. Now like an ambitious Coward 
that betrayes himselfe with fearefull delay: you must suffer for the treason 
you neuer committed. Goe hide thy selfe behind yound'arras, instantly. 
Sebastian! What doe you here so late?
Nothing yet; but I hope I shall.—
Y'are very bold.
And you very valiant; for you met mee at full Cariere.
You come to ha'me moue your fathers reconciliation. 
Ile write a word or two i'your behalfe.
A word or two, Madame? that you doe for mee, will not be contain'd in lesse 
then the compasse of two sheetes. But in plaine termes, shall wee take 
the opportunitie of priuatenesse?
What to doe?
To dance the beginning of the world after the English manner.
Why not after the French or Italian?
Fie. They dance it preposterously; backward.
Are you so actiue to dance?
I can shake my heeles.
Y'are well made for't.
Measure me from top to toe; you shall not finde 
mee differ much from the true standard of proportion.
I thinke I am accurs'd. Sebastian! There's one at the doore has beaten opportunitie 
away from vs. In briefe, I loue thee. And it shall not be long before I giue thee 
a testimony of it. To saue thee now from suspition; doe no more but draw thy Rapier; 
chase thy selfe; and when hee comes in, rush by without taking notice of him. 
Onely seeme to be angry, and let me alone for the rest.
Now by the hand of Mercurie.
What's the matter wife?
Ooh, Ooh, Husband!
Prithee what ail'st thou woman?
O feele my pulse. It beates I warrant you. Be patient a little sweet Husband; 
tarry but till my breath come to me againe, and Ile satisfie you.
What ailes Sebastian, he lookes so distractedly?
The poore Gentleman's almost out on's wits I thinke. You remember 
the displeasure his Father tooke against him about 
the liberty of speech he vs'd euen now when your daughter went to be marryed.
Yes, what of that?
T'has craz'd him sure: he met a poore man i'the street euen now. Vpou what quarrell 
I know not: but hee pursued him so violently, that if 
my house had not beene his rescue; he had surely killed him.
What a strange desperate young man is that!
Nay husband, hee grew so in rage when hee saw the man was conueyed from him, 
that he was ready euen to haue drawne his naked weapon vpon mee. And had 
not your knocking at the doore preuented him; surely h'ad done something to mee.
Where's the man?
Alas here. I warrant you the poore fearefull soule is scarce come to himselfe againe yet.
—If the foole haue any wit hee will apprehend mee.—Doe you heare sir?
You may be bold to come forth; the Fury that haunted you is gone.
Are you sure hee is gone?
Hee's gone; hee's gone, I warrant thee.
I would I were gone too. Has shooke mee almost into a dead palsie.
How fell the difference betweene you?
I would I were out at the backe doore.
Th'art safe enough. Prithee tell's the falling out.
Yes sir, when I haue recouered my spirits. My memory is almost frighted from mee.
—Oh so, so, so.— Why Sir, as I came along the streete Sir;—this same Gentleman 
came stumbling after mee, and trod o'my heele,—  I cryed O. Doe you cry sirrah? 
saies hee. Let mee see your heele; if it be not hurt, Ile make you cry for something. 
So he claps my head betweene his legges, and pulles off my shooe. 
I hauing shifted no sockes in a sea' night, the Gentleman cryed foh; and said 
my feete were base and cowardly feete, they stuncke for feare. 
Then hee knock'd my shooe about my pate, and I cryed O, once more. 
In the meane time comes a shag-hair'd dogge by, and rubbes against his shinnes. 
The Gentleman tooke the dog in shagge-haire to be some Watch-man in a rugge gowne; 
and swore hee would hang mee vp at the next doore with my lanthorne in my hand, 
that passengers might see their way as they went without rubbing against 
Gentlemens shinnes. So, for want of a Cord. hee tooke his owne garters off; 
and as he was going to make a nooze, I watch'd my time and ranne away. 
And as I ranne (indeede) I bid him hang himselfe in his owne gatters. 
So hee in choler, puisued mee hither as you see.
Why this sauours of distraction.
Of meere distraction.
How soeuer it sauours, I am sure it smels like a lye.
Thou maist goe forth at the backe doore (honest fellow) the way is priuate and safe.
So it had neede, for your fore-doore (here) is both common and dangerous.
Good night honest Fresco.
Good night Madame; if you get mee kissing o'Ladies againe.—
This fals out handsomely.
But yet the matter does not well succeed;
Till I haue brought it to the very deede.
Serieant! what houre o'the night is't.
About one.
I would you would relieue me; for I am
So heauie, that I shall ha'much adoe;
To stand out my perdu.
Ile e'en but walke
The round (sir) and then presently returne.
For God's sake Serieant relieue me, aboue fiue houres together 
in so foule a stormy night as this?
Why t'isa musique Souldier. Heauen and earth are now in consort, 
when the Thunder and the Canon play one to another.
I know not why I should be thus inclin'd to sleepe, I feele my disposition 
press'd with a necessitie of heauines. Souldier! if thou hast any better eyes, 
I prithee wake mee when the Serieant comes.
Sir, t'is so darke and stormy that I shall scarce eyther see 
or heare him e'er he comes vpon mee.
I cannot force my selfe to wake.—
Returne to France; for thy old Father's dead;
And thou by murther, disinherited.
Attend with patience the successe of things;
But leaue reuenge vnto the King of kings.
O my affrighted soule! what fearefull dreame
Was this that wak'd mee? Dreames are but the rais'd
Impressions of premeditated things,
By serious apprehension left vpon
Our mindes, or else th'imaginary shapes
Of obiects proper to th' complexion, or
The dispositions of our bodyes. These
Can neyther of them be the cause, why I
Should dreame thus; for my mind has not been mou'd
With any one conception of a thought
To such a purpose; nor my nature wont
To trouble me with phantasies of terror.
It must be something that my Genius would
Informe me of. Now gratious heauen forbid!
O! let my Spirit be depriu'd of all
Fore-sight and knowledge, ere it vnderstand
That vision acted; or diuine that act
To come. Why should I thinke so? Left I not
My worthy Father i'the kind regard
Of a most louing Vncle? Souldier! sawst
No apparition of a man?
You dreame Sir; I saw nothing.
Tush. These idle dreames
Are fabulous. Our boyling phantasies
Like troubled waters falsifie the shapes
Of things retain'd in them; and make' em seeme
Confounded, when they are distinguish'd, So
My actions daily conuersant with warre;
(The argument of bloud and death) had left
(Perhaps) th'imaginary presence of
Some bloudy accident vpon my minde:
Which mix'd confusedly with other thoughts,
(Whereof th'remembrance of my Father, might
Be one) presented all together, seeme
Incorporate; as if his body were
The owner of that bloud, the subiect of
That death; when hee's at Paris, and that bloud
Shed here. It may be thus. I would not leaue
The warre, for reputatio'ns sake, vpon
An idle apprehension; a vaine dreame.
Stand. Stand, I say. No? Why then haue at thee. 
Sir, if you will not stand, Ile make you fall? Nor stand, nor fall? 
Nay then the Diuel's damme has broke her husbands head: for sure it is a Spirit, 
I shot it through, and yet it will not fall.
O pardon me! my doubtfull heart was slow
To credit that which I did feare to know.
SEt downe the Body. Pay earth what shee lent.
But shee shall beare a liuing monument,
To let succeeding ages truely know.
That shee is satisfied, what hee did owe:
Both principall and vse; because his worth
Was better at his death then at his birth.
And with his Body, place that memorie
Of noble Charlemont his worthie Sonne.
And giue their Graues the rites that doe belong
To Souldiers. They were Souldiers both. The Father
Held open warre with Sinne; the Sonne with bloud:
This in a warre more gallant, that more good.
There place their Armes; and here their Epitaphes.
And may these Lines suruiue the last of graues.
The Epitaph of Montferrers.
HEre lye the Ashes of that earth and fire;
whose heat and fruit, did feede and warme the poore.
And they (as if they would in sighes expire,
and into teares dissolue) his death deplore.
Hee did that good freely for goodnesse sake,
Unforc'd: for gen'rousnesse he held so deare,
That hee fear'd none but him that did him make,
and yet he seru'd Him more for loue then feare.
So's life prouided, that though he did dye
A soddaine death; yet dyed not sodainely.
The Epitaph of Charlement.
HIs Body lies interr'd within this mould;
Who dyed a young man, yet departed old.
And in all strength of youth that Man can haue,
Was ready still to drop into his graue.
For ag'd in vertue with a youthfull eye,
He welcom'd it being still prepar'd to dye;
And liuing so, though young depriu'd of breath,
He did not suffer an vntimely death.
But we may say of his braue bless'd decease
He dyed in warre; and yet hee dyed in peace.
O might that fire reuiue the ashes of
This Phenix! yet the wonder would not be
So great as he was good; and wondred at
For that. His life's example was so true
A practique of Religion's Theorie,
That her Diuinitie seem'd rather the
Description then th'instruction of his life.
And of his goodnesse, was his vertuous Sonne
A worthy imitatour. So that 
on These two Herculean pillars, where their armes
Are plac'd; there may be writ, Non vltra. For
Beyond their liues as well for youth as age;
Nor young nor old, in merit or in name;
Shall e'er exceede their vertues or their fame.
T'is done. Thus faire accomplements make foule
Deedes gratious. Charlemont! come now when thou wilt.
I'ue buryed vnder these two marble stones
Thy liuing hopes; And thy dead fathers bones.
O thou that knowest me iustly Charlemont's.
Though in the forc'd possession of another;
Since from thine owne free spirit wee receiue it,
That our affections cannot be compel'd,
Though' our actions may; be not displeas'd, if on
The altar of his Tombe, I sacrifice
My teares. They are the iewels of my loue
Dissolued into griefe: and fall vpon
His blasted Spring; as Aprill dewe, vpon
A sweet young blossome shak'd before the time.
Goe see my Truncks disposed of, Ile but walk
A turne or two i'th Church and follow you.
O! here's the fatall monument of my
Dead Father first presented to mine eye.
What's here? in memory of Charlemont?
Some false relation has abus'd beliefe.
I am deluded. But I thanke thee Heauen.
For euer let me be deluded thus.
My Castabella mourning o'er my Hearse?
Sweete Castabella rise, I am not dead.
O heauen defend mee.
I Beshrew my rash
And inconsid'rate passion.—Castabella!
That could not thinke—my Castabella!—that
My sodaine presence might affright her sense.—
I prithee (my affection) pardon mee.
Reduce thy vnderstanding to thine eye.
Within this habite which thy misinform'd
Conceipt takes onely for a shape; liue both
The soule and body of thy Charlemont.
I feele a substance, warme, and soft, and moist,
Subiect to the capacitie of sense.
Which Spirits are not; for their effence is
Aboue the nature and the order of
Those Elements whereof our senses are
Created. Touch my lip. Why turnst thou from mee?
Griefe aboue griefes. That which should woe relieue,
Wish'd and obtain'd, giues greater cause to grieue.
Can Castabella thinke it cause of griefe
That the relation of my death proues false?
The presence of the person wee affect,
(Being hopelesse to enioy him) makes our griefe
More passionate then if wee saw him not.
Why not enioy? has absence chang'd thee?
Yes.
From maide to wife.
Art marryed?
O I am.
Married? had not my mother been a woman,
I should protest against the chastitie
Of all thy sexe. How can the Marchant, or
The Marriner absent whole yeares (from wiues
Experienc'd in the satisfaction of
Desire) promise themselues to finde their sheetes
Vnspotted with adultery, at their
Returne? when you that neuer had the sense
Of actuall temptation; could not stay
A few short months.
O doe but heare me speake.
But thou wert wise; and didst consider that
A Souldier might be maim'd, and so (perhaps)
Lose his habilitie to please thee.
No. That weaknes pleases me in him I have.
What? marryed to a man vnable too?
O strange incontinence! Why? was thy bloud
Increas'd to such a pleurisie of lust,
That of necessitie, there must a veyne
Be open'd; though by one that had no skill
To doe't?
Sir, I beseech you heare me.
Speake.
Heau'n knowes I am vnguiltie of this act.
Why? wer't thou forc'd to doe't?
Heau'n knowes I was.
What villaine did it?
Your Vncle 'D'amville.
And he that dispossess'd my loue of you;
Hath disinherited you of possession.
Disinherited? wherein haue I deseru'd
To be depriu'd of my deare Fathers loue?
Both of his loue and him. His soule's at rest.
But here your iniur'd patience may behold
The signes of his lamented memorie.
H'as found it. When I tooke him for a Ghoast,
I could endure the torment of my feare;
More eas'ly then I can his sorrowes heare.
Of all mens griefes must mine be singular?
Without example? Heere I met my graue.
And all mens woes are buried i' their graues
But mine. In mine my miseries are borne.
I pr'ithee sorrow leaue a little roome,
In my confounded and tormented mind;
For vnderstanding to deliberate
The cause or author of this accident.—
A close aduantage of my absence made,
To dispossesse me both of land and wife:
And all the profit does arise to him,
By whom my absence was first mou'd and vrg'd.
These circumstances (Vncle) tell me, you
Are the suspected author of those wrongs.
Whereof the lightest, is more heauie then
The strongest patience can endure to beare.
Now Sir! your businesse?
My Annuitie.
Not a deniere.
How would you ha'me liue?
Why turne Cryer. Cannot you turne Cryer?
Yes.
Then doe so, y'haue a good voice for't.
Y'are excellent at crying of a Rape.
Sir, I confesse in particular respect to your selfe,
I was somewhat forgetfull. Gen'rall honestie possess'd me.
Goe, th'art the base corruption of my bloud; And like a Tetter growes't vnto my flesh.
Inflict any punishment vpon me. The seueritie shall not discourage me, 
if it be not shamefull; so you'l but put money i'my purse. 
The want of money makes a free spirit more mad then the possession does an Vsurer.
Not a farthing.
Would you ha'me turne purse-taker? T'is the next way to doe't. For want is like the 
Racque; it drawes a man to endanger himselfe to the gallowes rather then endure it.
What art thou? Stay. Assist my troubled sence. My apprehension will distract me. Stay.
What art thou? speake.
The spirit of Charlemont.
O stay! compose me. I dissolue.
No. T'is prophane. Spirits are inuisible. T'is the fiend i'the 
likenesse of Charlemont. I will haue no conuersation with Sathan.
The Spirit of Charlemont? I'le try that.
'Fore God thou sayest true, th'art all Spirit.
Goe call the Officers.
Th'art a villaine; and the Sonne of a villaine.
You lye.
Haue at thee.
Reuenge, to thee Ile dedicate this worke.
Hold Charlemont!
Let him reuenge my murder, and thy wrongs,
To whom the lustice of Reuenge belongs.
You torture me betweene the passion of my bloud, and the religion of my soule,
A good honest fellow.
What? wounded? apprehend him. Sir; is this your salutation for the courtesie 
I did you when wee parted last? You ha'forgot I lent you a thousand Crownes. First, 
let him aunswere for this riot. When the Law is satisfied for that; an action for his debt 
shall clap him vp againe. I tooke you for a Spirit; and Ile coniure you before I ha'done.
No. Ile turne Coniurer. Diuell! within this Circle, 
in the midst of all thy force and malice I coniure thee doe thy worst.
Away with him.
Sir, I haue got a scratch or two here for your sake. 
I hope you'l giue mee money to pay the Surgeon.
Borachio! fetch me a thousand Crownes. I am content to countenance the freedome 
of your spirit when t'is worthily imployed. A Gods name giue behauiour the full 
scope of gen'rous libertie; but let it not disperse and spend 
it selfe in courses of vnbounded licence. Here, pay for your hurts.
I thanke you sir.—Gen'rous libertie.—that is to say, freely to bestow my habilities 
to honest purposes. Methinkes I should not follow that instruction now;
if hauing the  meanes to doe an honest office for an honest fellow, I should neglect it. 
Charlemont lyes in prison for a thousand Crownes. And here I haue a thousand Crownes. 
Honestie tels meet'were well done to release Charlemont. But discretion sayes 
I had much a doe to come by this; and when this shall be gone I know not where 
to singer any more: especially if I employ it to this vse, which is like to endanger mee 
into my Fathers perpetuall displeasure. And then I may goe hang my selfe, or be forc'd 
to doe that, will make another saue mee the labour. No matter. Charlemont! 
Thou gau'st mee my life and that's somewhat of a purer earth then gold as fine as it is. 
T'is no courtesie I doe thee but thankefulnesse. I owe thee it and Ile pay it. 
Hee fought brauely, but the Officers drag'd him villanously. Arrant knaues! 
for vsing him so discourtcously; may the sins o'the poore people be so few, 
that you sha'not be able to spare so much out o'your gettings, as will pay for the hyre 
of a lame staru'd hackney to ride to an execution, But goe a foote to the gallowes, 
and be hang'd. May elder brothers turne good husbands, and younger brothers 
get good wiues; that there be no neede of debt-bookes, nor vse of Serieants. 
May there be all peace but i'the warre, and all charitie but i'the Diuell; 
so that prisons may be turn'd to Hospitals, though the Officers liue o'the beneuolence. 
If this curse might come to passe, the world would say, Blessed be he that curseth.
I graunt thee, Heauen, Thy goodnesse doth command
Our punishments: but yet no further then
The measure of our sinnes. How should they else
Be iust? Or how should that good purpose of
Thy Iustice take effect, by bounding men
Within the confines of humanitie,
When our afflictions doe exceede our crimes?
Then they doe rather teach the barb'rous world
Examples that extend her cruelties
Beyond their owne dimentions; and instruct
Our actions to be more, more barbarous.
O my afflicted soule! How torment swels
Thy apprehension with prophane conceipt,
Against the sacred iustice of my God?
Our owne constructions are the authors of
Our miserie. We neuer measure our
Conditions but with Men aboue vs in
Estate. So while our Spirits labour to
Be higher then our fortunes th'are more base.
Since all those attributes which make men seeme
Superiour to vs; are Man's Subiects; and
Were made to serue him. The repining Man
Is of a seruile spirit to deiect
The valew of himselfe below their estimation.
Here. Take my sword.—How now my wilde Swag'rer? y'are tame enough now; 
are you not? The penurie of a prison is like a soft consumption. 
T'will humble the pride o' your mortalitie; and arme your soule in compleate 
patience to endure the waight of affliction without feeling it. What? 
Hast no musicke in thee? Th'hast trebles and bases enough. Treble iniurie; 
and base vsage. But trebles and bases make poore musick without meanes. 
Thou want'st Meanes; Doest? what? Doest droope? art deiected?
No Sir. I haue a heart aboue the reach
Of thy most violent maliciousnesse.
A fortitude in scorne of thy contempt;
(Since Fate is pleas'd to haue me suffer it)
That can beare more then thou hast power t'inflict.
I was a Baron That thy Father has
Depriu'd me off. In stead of that, I am
Created King. I'ue lost a Signiorie,
That was confin'd within a piece of earth;
A Wart vpon the body of the world.
But now I am an Emp'rour of a world.
This little world of Man. My passions are
My Subiects; and I can command them laugh;
Whilst thou doest tickle'em to death with miserie.
T'is brauely spoken; and I loue thee for't. Thou liest here for a thousand crownes. 
Here are a thousand to redeeme thee. Not for the ransome o'my life thou gau'st mee. 
That I value not at one crowne. T'is none o'my deed. Thanke my Father for't. 
T'is his goodnesse. Yet hee lookes not for thankes. For he does it vnder hand; 
out of a reseru'd disposition to doe thee good without ostentation.
—Out o' great heart you'l refus't now; will you?
No. Since I must submit my selfe to Fate; I neuer will neglect the offer of one benefit; 
but entertaine them as her fauours; and th'inductions to some end of better fortune. 
As whose instrument; I thanke thy courtesie.
Well, come along.
Daughter you doe not well to vrge me. I
Ha'done no more then Iustice. Charlemont
Shall die and rot in prison; and t'is iust.
O Father! Mercie is an attribute
As high as Iustice; an essentiall part
Of his vnbounded goodnesse, whose diuine
Impression, forme, and image man should beare.
And (me thinks) Man should loue to imitate
His Mercie; since the onely countenance
Of Iustice, were destruction; if the sweet
And louing fauour of his mercie did
Not mediate betweene it and our weakenesse.
Forbeare. You will displease me. He shal rot.
Deare Sir! Since by your greatnesse, you
Are nearer heau'n in place; be nearer it
In goodnesse. Rich men should transcend the poore,
As clouds the earth; rais'd by the comfort of
The Sunne, to water dry and barren grounds.
If neither the impression in your soule
Of goodnesse; nor the dutie of your place,
As goodnesse substitute; can moue you: then
Let nature, which in Sauages, in beasts,
Can stirre to pittie, tell you that hee is
Your kinsman;—
You expose your honestie
To strange construction: Why should you so vrge
Release for Charlemont? Come you professe
More nearenesse to him then your modestie
Can answere. You haue tempted my suspition.
I tell thee hee shall starue, and dye, and rot.
Vncle, I thanke you.
Much good do it you.—Who did release him?
I.
You are a villaine.
Y'are my Father.
I must temporize.—
Nephew, had not his open freedome made
My disposition knowne; I would ha'borne
The course and inclination of my loue
According to the motion of the Sunne,
Inuisibly inioyed and vnderstood.
That showes your good works are directed to
No other end then goodnesse. I was rash,
I must confesse. But—
I will excuse you.
To lose a Father, and (as you may thinke)
Be disinherited (it must be graunted)
Are motiues to impatience. But for death,
Who can auoide it? And for his estate,
In the vncertaintie of both your liues,
T'was done discreetly to conferre't vpon
A knowne Successour; being the next in bloud.
And one (deare Nephew) whom in time to come,
You shall haue cause to thanke. I will not be
Your dispossessour, but your Gardian.
I will supply your Fathers vacant place,
To guide your greene improuidence of youth;
And make you ripe for your inheritance.
Sir, I embrance your gen'rous promises.
Embracing? I behold the obiect that
Mine eye affects. Deere Cosin Charlemont.
My elder Sonne! He meetes you happily.
For with the hand of our whole family
We enterchange th'indenture of our Loues.
And I accept it. Yet not ioyfully
Because y'are sicke.
Sir; His affection's sound,
Though hee be sicke in body.
Sicke indeede.
A gen'rall weakenesse did surprise my health
The very day I married Castabella.
As if my sicknesse were a punishment,
That did arrest me for some iniurie
I then committed. Credit me (my Loue)
I pittie thy ill fortune to be match'd
With such a weake vnpleasing bedfellow.
Beleeue me Sir; it neuer troubles me.
I am as much respectlesse to enioy
Such pleasure as ignorant what it is.
Thy Sexes wonder. Vnhappy Charlemont.
Come, let's to supper. There we will confirme
The eternall bond of our concluded loue.
COme Soquette; your worke! let's examine your worke. What's here? a Medlar with 
a Plum-tree growing hard by it; The leaues o' the Plum-tree falling off; the gumme issuing 
out o' the perish'd ioynts; and the branches some of 'em dead, and some rotten; 
and yet but a young Plum-tree. In good sooth, very prettie.
The Plum-tree (forsooth) growes so neare the Medlar, that the Medlar suckes and 
drawes all the sap from it; and the naturall strength o' the ground, so that it cannot prosper.
How conceipted you are! But heere th'ast made a Tree to beare no fruit. Why's that?
There growes a Sauin-tree next it forsooth.
Forsooth you are a little too wittie in that.
But this Honisuckle windes about this white-thorne very prettily and louingly; 
sweet Mistresse Cataplasma.
Monsieur Sebastian! in good sooth very vprightly welcome this euening.
What? moralizing vpon this Gentlewomans needleworke? let's see.
No Sir. Onely examining whether it be done to the true nature and life o' the thing?
Heere y'haue set a Medlar with a Batchelers-button o' one side; and a Snaile o' th'tother. 
The Batchelers-button should haue held his head vp more pertly towards the Medlar;  
the Snaile o'th'tother side, should ha'beene wrought with an artificiall lazinesse, 
doubling his taile, and putting out his horne but halfe the length. And then the Medlar 
falling (as it were) from the lazie Snaile, and enclining towards the pert 
Batchelers-button; their branches spreading and winding one within another as 
if they did embrace. But heere's a morall. A poppring Peare-tree growing vpon the 
banke of a Riuer; seeming continually to looke downewards into the water, 
as if it were enamour'd of it; and euer as the fruit ripens, lets it fall for loue (as it were) 
into her lap. Which the wanton Streame, like a Strumpet, no sooner receiues, 
but she carries it away, and bestowes it vpon some other creature she maintaines: 
still seeming to play and dally vnder the Poppring, so long, that it has almost wash'd 
away the earth from the roote; and now the poore Tree stands as if it were readie 
to fall and perish by that whereon it spent all the substance it had.
Morall for you that loue those wanton running waters.
But is not my Lady Leuidulcia come yet?
Her purpose promis'd vs her companie ere this. Sirrah! your Lute and your Booke.
Well said. A lesson o' th'Lute to entertaine the time with till she comes.
Sol, fa, mi, la.—Mi, mi mi.—Precious! Doest not see mi betweene the two Crochets? 
Strike mee full there.—So—forward.—This is a sweet straine, 
and thou finger'st it beastly. Mi is a laerg there; and the prick that stands before mi, 
a long; alwaies halfe your note.— Now—Runne your diuision pleasingly 
with those quauers. Obserue all your graces i'the touch.—Heere's a sweet cloze—
strike it full, it sets off your musicke delicately.
Puritie be in this House.
T'is now enter'd; and welcome with your good Ladiship.
Cease that musicke. Here's a sweeter instrument.
Restraine your libertie. See you not Snuffe?
What does the Stinkard here? put Snuffe out. He's offensiue.
No. The credit of his companie defends my being abroad from the eye of Suspition.
Wil't please your Ladiship goe vp into the Closet? 
There are those Falles and Tyres I tolde you of.
Monsieur Snuffe, I shall request your patience. My stay will not be long.
My duty Madame.—Falles and Tyres? I begin to suspect what Falles and Tyres 
you meane. My Lady and Sebastian the Fall and the Tyre, and I the Shadow. 
I perceiue the puritie of my conuersation is vs'd but for a propertie to couer the 
vncleanenesse of their purposes. The very contemplation o' the thing, makes 
the spirit of the flesh begin to wriggle in my bloud. And heere my desire has met 
with an obiect alreadie. This Gentlewoman (me thinkes) should be swayed with 
the motion; liuing in a house where mouing example is so common. 
Temptation has preuail'd ouer mee; and I will attempt to make it ouercome her.
—Mistresse Cataplasma! My Lady (it seemes) has some businesse that requires her stay. 
The fairenesse o' the euening inuites me into the ayre; will it please you giue this 
Gentlewoman leaue to leaue her worke, 
and walke a turne or two with me for honest recreation?
With all my heart Sir. Goe Soqueite; giue eare to his instructions; 
you may get vnderstanding by his companie I can tell you.
In the way of holinesse; Mistresse Cataplasma.
Good Monsieur Snuffe!—I will attend your returne.
Your hand Gentlewomen.—
The flesh is humble till the Spirit moue it;
But when t'is rais'd it will command aboue it.
Your sadnesse and the sicknesse of my Sonne,
Haue made our company and conference
Lesse free and pleasing then I purpos'd it.
Sir; for the present I am much vnfit
For conuersation or societie.
With pardon I will rudely take my leaue.
Good night; deere Nephew.—
Seest thou that same man?
Your meaning Sir?
That fellowes life, Borachio.
Like a superfluous Letter in the Law,
Endangers our assurance.
Scrape him out.
Wut doe't?
Giue me your purpose I will doe't.
Sad melancholy has drawne Charlemont,
With meditation on his Fathers death,
Into the solitarie walke behind the Church.
The Churchyard? This the fittest place for death,
Perhaps he's praying. Then he's fit to die.
We'l send him charitably to his graue.
No matter how thou tak'st him. First take this.—
Thou knowest the place. Obserue his passages;
And with the most aduantage make a stand;
That fauour'd by the darknesse of the night,
His brest may fall vpon thee at so neare
A distance, that he sha'not shunne the blow.
The deede once done, thou mai'st retire with safety.
The place is vnfrequented; and his death
Will be imputed to th'attempt of theeues.
Be carelesse. Let your mind be free and cleare.
This Pistoll shall discharge you of your feare.
But let me call my proiects to account,
For what effect and end I haue engag'd
My selfe in all this bloud? To leaue a state
To the succession of my proper bloud.
But how shall that succession be continued?
Not in my elder Sonne, I feare, Disease
And weakenesse haue disabled him for issue.
For th'tother; his loose humour will endure
No bond of marriage. And I doubt his life;
His spirit is so boldly dangerous.
O pittie that the profitable end,
Of such a prosp'rous murther should be lost!
Nature forbid. I hope I haue a body
That will not suffer me to loose my labour,
For want of issue, yet. But then't must be
A Bastard.—Tush; they onely father bastards,
That father other mens begettings. Daughter!
Be it mine owne; let it come whence it will.
I am resolu'd. Daughter!
My Lord.
I prithee call my Daughter.
Your pleasure Sir.
Is thy Husband i'bed?
Yes my Lord.
The euening's faire. I prithee walke a turne or two.
Come Iaspar.
No.
Weel' walke but to the corner o'the Church;
And I haue something to speake priuately.
No matter, Stay.
This falles out happily.
Twelue.
T'is a good houre, t'will strike one anon.
How fit a place for contemplation is this dead of night, among the dwellings 
of the dead.—This graue.— Perhappes th'inhabitant vvas in his life time the 
possessour of his owne desires. Yet in the midd'st of all his greatnesse and his wealth; 
he was lesse rich and lesse contented, then in this poore piece of earth, lower and lesser 
then a Cottage. For heere he neither wants nor cares. Now that his body fauours 
of corruption; Hee enioyes a sweeter rest then e'er hee did amongst the sweetest pleasures 
of this life. For heere, there's nothing troubles him.—And there.
—In that graue lies another. He (perhaps) was in his life as full of miserie as this of 
happinesse. And here's an end of both. Now both their states are equall. O that Man, 
with so much labour should aspire to wordly height; when in the humble earth, 
the world's condition's at the best! Or scorne inferiour men; 
since to be lower then a worme, is to be higher then a King!
Then fall and rise.
What villaines hand was that? saue thee or thou shalt perish.
Zownes vnsau'd I thinke.
What? Haue I kill'd him? whatsoe'er thou beest I would thy hand had prosper'd. 
For I was vnfit to liue, and well prepar'd to die. What shall I doe? accuse my selfe. 
Submit me to the law, and that will quickly end this violent encrease of miserie. 
But t'is a murther to be accessarie to mine owne death. I will not. 
I will take this opportunitie to scape. It may be Heau'n reserues me to some better end.
Nay good Sir; I dare not. In good sooth I come of a generation both by Father 
and Mother, that were all as fruitfull as Costard-mongers wiues.
Tush then, a Timpanie is the greatest danger can be fear'd. Their fruitfulnesse 
turnes but to a certaine kind of flegmatique windie disease.
I must put my vnderstanding to your trust Sir. I would be loath to be deceiu'd.
No, conceiue; thou sha't not. Yet thou shalt profit by my instruction too. 
My bodie is not euery day drawne dry, wench.
Yet mee thinkes Sir, your want of vse should rather make your body like a Well, 
the lesser t'is drawne, the sooner it growes dry.
Thou shalt try that instantly.
But we want place and opportunity.
We haue both. This is the backe side of the House which the superstitious 
call Saint Winifred's Church; and is verily a conuenient vnfrequented place.
—Where vnder the close Curtaines of the night;
You purpose i'the darke to make me light. 
But what ha' you there?
This disguise is for securitie sake wench. There's a talke, thou know'st, that 
the Ghoast of olde Montferrers walks. In this Church he was buried. 
Now if any stranger fall vpon vs before our businesse be ended; in this disguise 
I shall be taken for that Ghoast; and neuer be call'd to examination I warrant thee. Thus 
wee shall scape both preuention and discouerie. How doe I looke in this habite wench?
So like a Ghost that notwithstanding I haue som foreknowledge of you, 
you make my haire stand almost an end.
I will try how I can kisse in this beard.—O fie, fie, fie. I will put it off; 
and then kisse; and then put it on. I can doe the rest without kissing.
What ha' wee heere? a Sheete? a haire? a beard? What end was this disguise intended for? 
No matter what. I'le not expostulate the purpose of a friendly accident. 
Perhaps it may accommodate my scape.—I feare I am pursued. For more assurance, 
I'le hide mee heere i'th Charnell house; this conuccation-house of dead mens sculles.— 
Death's head! deceiu'st my hold? Such is the trust to all mortalitic.—
My Lord! The night growes late. 
Your Lordship spake of something you desir'd to moue in priuate.
Yes. Now I'le speake it. Th'argument is loue. The smallest ornament of thy sweet forme 
(that abstract of all pleasure) can command the sences into passion; 
and thy entire perfection is my obiect; yet I loue thee with the freedome of my reason. 
I can giue thee reason for my loue.
Loue me; my Lord? I doe beleeue it, for I am the wife of him you loue.
T'is true. By my perswasion thou wert forc'd to marrie one, vnable to performe 
the office of a Husband. I was author of the wrong. 
My conscience suffers vnder't; and I would disburthen it by satisfaction.
How?
I will supply that pleasure to thee which he cannot.
Are y'a diuell or a man?
A man; and such a man, as can returne thy entertainment with as prodigall a body, 
as the couetous desire of woman euer was delighted with. So, that besides the full 
performance of thy empty Husbands dutie; thou shalt haue the ioy of children to continue 
the succession of thy bloud. For the appetite that steales her pleasure; drawes the forces 
of the body to an vnited strength; and puts 'em altogether into action; neuer failes of 
procreation. All the purposes of Man aime but at one of these two ends; 
pleasure or profit: And in this one sweet coniunction of our loues. 
they both will meete. Would it not grieue thee, that a Stranger to thy bloud, 
should lay the first foundation of his house vpon the ruines of thy family?
Now Heau'n defend me! May my memorie be vtterly extinguish'd; and the heire of him 
that was my Fathers enemie, raise his eternall monument vpon our ruines; 
ere the greatest pleasure or the greatest profit, euer tempt me to continue it by incest.
Incest? Tush. These distances affinitie obserues; are articles of bondage cast vpon 
our freedomes by our owne subiections. Nature allowes a gen'rall libertie of generation 
to all  creatures else. Shall Man to whose command and vse 
all creatures were made subiect be lesse free then they?
O God! is thy vnlimited and infinite omnipotence lesse free because thou doest no ill? 
or if you argue meerely out of Nature; doe you not degenerate from that; 
and are you not vnworthie the prerogatiue of Natures Maister-piece, 
when basely you prescribe your selfe authoritie and law from their examples 
whom you should command? I could confute you; but the horrour of the argument 
confounds my vnderstanding. —Sir, I know, you doe but try me in your Sonnes behalfe; 
suspecting that my strength and youth of bloud cannot containe themselues 
with impotence.—Beleeue me (Sir) I neuer wrong'd him. If it be your lust; 
O quench it on their prostituted flesh, whose trade of sinne can please desire 
with more delight, and lesse offence.—The poyson of your breath; 
euaporated from so foule a soule; infects the ayre more then the dampes 
that rise from bodies but halfe rotten in their graues.
Kisse me, I warrant thee my breath is sweet. These dead mens bones lie heere of purpose 
to inuite vs to supply the number of the liuing. Come; we'l get young bones and doe't. 
I will enioy thee. No? Nay then inuoke your great suppos'd protectour; I will doe't.
Suppos'd protectour? Are y'an Athiest? Then, I know my prayers and teares are spent in 
vaine. O patient Heau'n! Why doest thou not expresse thy wrath in thunderbolts; 
to teare the frame of man in pieces? How can earth endure the burthen of this wickednesse 
without an earthquake? Or the angry face of Heau'n be not enflam'd with lighning.
Coniure vp the Diuell and his Dam; Crie to the graues;
the dead can heare thee; inuocate their helpe.
O would this graue might open, and my body were bound to the dead carkasse 
of a man for euer, e're it entertaine the lust of this detested villaine.
Tereas-like, thus I will force my passage to—
The Diuell.
Now Lady! with the hand of Charlemont, 
I thus redeeme you from the arme of lust.—My Castabella!
My deare Charlemont!
For all my wrongs I thanke thee gracious Heau'n; th'ast made me satisfaction; 
to reserue me for this blessed purpose. Now sweet Death, I'le bid thee welcome. 
Come. I'le guard thee home; and then I'le cast my selfe into the armes of apprehension, that 
the law may make this worthie worke, the crowne of all my actions being the best and last.
The last? The law? Now Heau'n forbid! what ha'you done?
Why, I haue kill'd a man; not murder'd him, my Castabella; He would ha'murder'd me.
Then Charlemont; the hand of Heau'n directed thy defence.
That wicked Athiest, I suspect his plot.
My life he seekes. I would he had it since he has depriu'd mee 
of those blessings that should make mee loue it; Come; I'le giue it him.
You sha'not. I will first expose my selfe to certaine danger, 
then for my defence destroy the man that sau'd mee from destruction.
Thou canst not satisfie me better, then to be the instrument of my release from miserie.
Then worke it by escape. Leaue mee to this protection that still guards the innocent; 
Or I will be a partner in your destinie.
My soule is heauie. Come; lie downe to rest;
These are the pillowes whereon men sleepe best.
They lie downe with either of them a Death's head for a pillow.
Soquette! Soquette! Soquette! O art thou there?—
Verily thou lyest in a fine premiditate readinesse for the purpose. 
Come kisse me sweet Soquette.—Now puritie defend me from the sinne of Sodom.
—This is a creature of the  masculine gender.—Verily the Man is blasted.
— Yea? cold and stiffe?—Murder, murder, murder.
Why doest thou stare vpon me? Thou art not the scull of him I murder'd. 
What hast thou to doe to vexe my conscience? Sure thou wert the head of a most 
dogged Vsurer, th'art so vncharitable. And that Bawde the skie, there; 
she could shut the windowes and the dores of this great chamber of the world; 
and draw the curtaines of the clouds betweene those lights and me about this bed of earth, 
when that same Stumpet Murder & my selfe committed sin together. 
Then she could leaue vs i' the darke, till the close deed was done: But now, 
that I begin to feele the loathsome horrour of my sinne; and (like a Leacher emptied 
of his lust) desire to burie my face vnder my eye-browes, and would steale from 
my shame vnseene; she meetes me i'th face with all her light corrupted eyes, 
to challenge payment o' mee.—O beholde. Yonder's the Ghoast of olde Montferrers in 
a long white sheete, climbing yon loftie mountaine to complaine to Heau'n of me.
— Montferrers! 'pox o' fearefulnesse. T' is nothing but a faire white cloude. 
Why? was I borne a coward? He lies that sayes so. Yet the count'nance of a bloudlesse 
worme might ha' the courage now to turne my bloud to water. The trembling motion of 
an Aspen leafe, would make me like the shadow of that leafe he shaking vnder't. I could 
now commit a murder', were it but to drinke the fresh warme bloud of him I murder'd;
to supply the want and weakenesse o'mine owne; t'is growne so colde and flegmaticke.
Murder, murder, murder.
Mountaines o'erwhelme mee, the Ghoast of olde Montferrers haunts me.
Murder, murder, murder.
O were my body circumuolu'd within that cloude; that when 
the thunder teares his passage open, it might scatter me to nothing in the ayre!
Here you shali finde the murder'd body.
Black Beelzebub, and all his hell-hounds come to apprehend me?
No my good Lord. Wee come to apprehend the murderer. The Ghoast (great Pluto) 
was a foole; vnfit to be imployed in any serious businesse for the state of hell. 
Why? could not he ha' suffer'd me to raise the mountaine o' my sinnes with one 
as damnable as all the rest; and then ha' tumbled me to ruine? 
But apprehend me e'en betweene the purpose and the act? before it was committed?
Is this the murderer? He speakes suspitiously.
No verily. This is my Lord D'amville. And his distraction (I thinke) growes out of his 
griefe for the losse of a faithfull seruant. For surely I take him to be Borachio that is slaine.
Haah! Borachio slaine? Thou look'st like Snuffe, doest not.
Yes in sincerity my Lord.
Harke thee?—Sawest thou not a Ghoast?
A Ghoast? where my Lord?—I smell a Foxe.
Heere i' the Churchyard.
Tush, tush; their walking spirits are meere imaginarie fables. There's no such 
thing in rerum natura. Heere is a man slaine. And with the Spirit of confideration, 
I rather think him to be the murderer got into that disguise, then any such phantastique toy.
My braines begin to put themselues in order. I apprehend thee now.
—T'is e'en so.—Borachio! I will search the Center but I'le finde the murderer.
Heere, heere, heere.—
Stay. A sleepe? so soundly? and so sweetly vpon Deathes Heads? and in a place 
so full of feare and horrour? Sure there is some other happinesse within 
the freedome of the conscience, then my knowledge e'er attain'd too.—Ho, ho, ho!
Y'are welcome Vncle. Had you sooner come,
You had beene sooner welcome. I'm the Man,
You seeke. You sha'not neede examine me.
My Nephew! and my Daughter! O my deare
Lamented bloud! what Fate has cast you thus
Vnhappily vpon this accident?
You know Sir, she's as cleare as Chastitie.
As her owne chastitie. The time; the place;
All circumstances argue that vncleare.
Sir, I confesse it; and repentantly
Will vndergoe the selfe same punishment,
That Iustice shall inflict on Charlemont.
Vniustly she betrayes her innocence.
But Sir, she's taken with you; and she must
To prison with you.
There's no remedie.
Yet were it not my Sonnes bed she abus'd;
My land should flie but both should be excus'd.
Is not my wife come in yet?
No my Lord.
Me thinks she's very affectedly enclin'd,
To young Sebastian's company o'late.
But iealousie is such a torment, that
I am afraid to entertaine it. Yet
The more I shunne by circumstance to meete
Directly with it, the more ground I finde
To circumuent my apprehension. First,
I know sh'as a perpetuall appetite;
Which being so oft encounter'd with a man
Of such a bold luxurious freedome, as
Sebastian is; and of so promising
A body: her owne bloud, corrupted, will
Betray her to temptation.—
Precious! I was sent by his Lady to see if her Lord were in bed; I should ha' 
done't slily without discouery; and now I am blurted vpon 'em before I was aware.
Know not you the Gentlewoman my wife brought home?
By sight my Lord. Her man was here but now.
Her man? I pr'ithee runne and call him quickly.— This villaine. I suspect him euer 
since I found him hid behind the Tapestry.—Frisco! th'art welcome Frisco.
—Leaue vs. Doest heare Frisco! is not my wife at thy Mistresses?
I know not my Lord.
I prithee tell me Frisco; we are priuate; tell me. Is not thy Mistresse a good wench?
How meanes your Lordship that? A wench o'the trade.?
Yes faith Frisco; e'en a wench o'the trade.
O no my Lord. Those falling diseases cause baldnesse;
and my misstress recovers the loss of hair, for she is a periwig maker.
And nothing else?
Sels Falls and Tyres, and Bodies for Ladies; or so.
So Sir: and she helpes my Lady to falles and bodies now and then; doe's she not?
At her Ladiships pleasure; my Lord.
Her pleasure; you Rogue? you are the Pandar to her pleasure, you Varlet, are you not? 
you know the conueyances betweene Sebastian and my wife. Tell me the truth; or by 
this hand I'le naile thy bosome to the earth. Stirre not you Dogge; but quickly tell the truth.
O Yes!
Is not thy Mistresse a Bawde to my wife?
O yes!
And acquainted with her trickes, and her plots, and her deuises.
O yes! If any man, 'Court, Citie or Countrey, has found my Lady Leuidulcia in bed, 
but my Lord Beforest, it is Sebastian.
What doest thou proclaime it? Doest thou crie it thou villaine?
Can you laugh it my Lord? I thought you meant to proclaime your selfe Cuckold.
The Watch met with my wish. I must request th'assistance of your offices. 
S'death; stay that villaine; pursue him.
Nay, if you get me any more into the Churchyard.
Why Soquette? I neuer got thee there yet.
Got me there? No. Not with childe.
I promis'd thee I would not; and I was as good as my word.
Yet your word was better then than your deede. 
But, steale vp into the little matted chamber o'the left hand.
I prithee, let it be the right hand; thou left'st me before and I did not like that.
'Precious quickly; So soone as my Mistresse shall be in bed I'le come to you.
I wonder Frisco stayes so long.
Mistreffe Soquette, a word with you.—
If he brings word my Husband is i'bed; I will aduenture one nights liberty to lie abroad.
—My strange affection to this Man!—T'is like that naturall sympathie which e'en 
among the sencelesse creatures of the earth, commands a mutuall inclination and consent: 
For though it seemes to be the free effect of mine owne voluntarie loue; 
yet I can neither restraine it, nor giue reason for't. But now t'is done; 
and in your power it lies to saue my honour; or dishonour me.
Enioy your pleasure (Madame) without feare. I neuer will betray the trust you haue 
committed to me. And you wrong your selfe, to let consideration of the sinne; 
molest your conscience. Mc thinkes t'is vniust, that a reproach should be inflicted on a 
woman for offending but with one; when t'is a light offence in Husbands to commit with many.
So it seemes to me.—Why how now Sebastian? making loue to that Gentlewoman? 
How many mistresses ha' you i'faith?
In faith; none. For I think none of 'em are faithfull,  but otherwise as many as cleane Shirts. 
The loue of a woman is like a Mushrom; it growes in one night, and will serue somwhat 
pleasingly, next morning to breakfast: but afterwards waxes fulsome and vnwholesome.
Nay by Saint Winifred; a woman's loue lasts as long as Winter fruit.
T'is true. Till new come in. By my experience no longer.
Some bodie's doing has vndone vs; and we are like pay dearely for't.
Pay deare? for what?
Wil't not be a chargeable reckoning, thinke you; when heere are halfe 
a dozen fellowes comming to call vs to account, 
with eu'rie man a seuerall bill in his hand, that wee are not able to discharge.
Passion o' me. What bouncing's that? Madame! withdraw your selfe.
Sebastian if you loue me, saue my honour.
What violence is this? What seeke you? Z'ounds! you shall not passe.
Pursue the Strumpet. Villaine giue mee way; or I will make my passage through thy bloud.
My bloud will make it slipperie my Lord. 
T'were better you would take another way. You may hap fall else.
I ha't ifaith.
O God! my Husband! my Sebastian! Husband! Neither can spake; yet both report my  
shame. Is this the sauing of my Honour? when their bloud runnes out in riuers; 
and my lust the fountaine whence it flowes? Deare Husband, let not thy departed spirit 
be displeas'd; if with adultrate lips I kisse thy cheeke. Heere I behold the hatefulnesse 
of lust; which brings me kneeling to embrace him dead; whose body  liuing 
I did loathe to touch. Now I can weepe. But what can teares doe good; 
when I weepe onely water, they weepe bloud? But could I make an Ocean with my teares; 
that on the floud this broken vessell of my body, laden heauie with light lust might suffer 
shipwrack, and so drowne my shame: then weeping were to purpose; but alas! 
The Sea wants water enough to wash away the foulenesse of my name. O! in their wounds; 
I feele my honour wounded to the death. Shall I out-liue my Honour? 
Must my life be made the worlds example? Since it must; then thus in detestation 
of my deede; to make th'eexample moue more forceably to vertue; thus, 
I seale it with a death as full of horrour as my life of sinne.
Hold Madame! Lord what a strange night is this.
May not Snuffe be suffer'd to goe out of himselfe?
Nor you; nor any. All must goe with vs.
O with what vertue lust should be withstood!
Since t'is a fire quench'd seldome without bloud.
VVHat sleep'st thou?
No my Lord. Nor sleepe; nor wake.
But in a slumber troublesome to both.
Whence comes this gold?
T'is part of the Reuenew;
Due to your Lordship since your brothers death.
To bed. Leaue me my gold.
And me my rest.
Two things wherewith one man is seldome blest.
Cease that harsh musicke. W'are not pleas'd with it.
Heere sounds a musicke whose melodious touch,
Like Angels voices rauishes the sence.
Behold thou ignorant Astronomer,
Whose wandring speculation seekes among
The planets for mens fortunes! with amazement,
Behold thine errour and be planet strucke.
These are the Starres whose operations make
The fortunes and the destinies of men.
Yond' lesser eyes of Heau'n, (like Subiects rais'd
Into their loftie houses, when their Prince
Rides vnderneath th'ambition of their loues)
Are mounted onely to behold the face,
Of your more rich imperious eminence,
With vnpreuented sight. Vnmaske faire Queene;
Vouchsafe their expectations may enioy
The gracious fauour they admire to see,
These are the Starres the Ministers of Fate;
And Mans high wisedome the superiour power,
To which their forces are subordinate.
D'amville! With all thy wisedome th'art a foole.
Not like those fooles that we terme innocents;
But a most wretched miserable foole.
Which instantly; to the confusion of
Thy proiects with despaire thou shalt behold.
What foolish dreame dares interrupt my rest?
To my confusion? How can that be? Since
My purposes haue hitherto beene borne
With prosp'rous Iudgement to secure successe.
Which nothing lives to dispossesse me off,
But apprehended Charlemont. And him,
This braine has made the happy instrument
To free Suspition, to annihilate
All interest and title of his owne;
To seale vp my assurance; and confirme
My absolute possession by the law.
Thus while the simple honest worshipper
Of a phantastique prouidence; groanes vnder
The burthen of neglected miserie;
My reall wisedome has rais'd vp a State,
That shall eternize my posteritie.
What's that?
The body of your younger Sonne slaine by the Lord Belforest.
Slaine? you lie.—Sebastian. Speake, Sebastian! H'as lost his hearing. 
A Physician presently. Goe call a Surgeon.
Ooh.
What groane was that? How does my elder Sonne? the sound came from his chamber.
He went sicke to bed my Lord.
Ooh.
The cries of Mandrakes neuer touch'd the eare, 
with more sad horrour then that voice does mine.
Neuer you will see your Sonne aliue.—
Nature forbid I e'er should see him dead.
Withdraw the Curtaines. O how does my Sonne?
Me thinkes, he's ready to giue vp the ghoast.
Destruction take thee and thy fatall tongue. Death, where's the Doctor?
—Art not thou the fact of that prodigious apparition star'd vpon me in my dreame?
The Doctor's come my Lord.
Doctor! Behold two Patients, in whose cure thy skill may purchase an eternall fame. 
If thou hast any reading in Hipocrates, Galen, or Avicen; if hearbs, or drugges, 
or mineralles haue any power to saue; Now let thy practise and their soueraigne vse, 
raise thee to wealth and honour.
If any roote of life remaines within'em capable of Phisicke; feare'em not, my Lord.
Ooh.
His gasping sighes are like the falling noise of some great building when the 
ground-worke breakes. On these two pillars stood the stately frame, and architecture 
of my loftie house. An Earthquake shakes'em. The foundation shrinkes. Deere Nature! 
in whose honour I haue rais'd a worke of glory to posteritie; 
O burie not the pride of that great action, vnder the fall and ruine of it selfe.
My Lord. These bodies are depriu'd of all the radicall abilitie of Nature. The heat of 
life is vtterly extinguish'd. Nothing remaines within the power of man that can restore them.
Take this gold; extract the Spirit of it, and inspire new life into their bodies.
Nothing can my Lord.
You ha'not yet examin'd the true state and constitution of their bodies. Sure, you ha'not. 
I'le reserue their waters till the morning. 
Questionlesse, their vrines will informe you better.
Ha, ha, ha.
Do'st laugh thou villaine! must my wisedome that has beene 
the obiect of mens admiration, now become the subiect of thy laughter?
Ooh.
Hee's dead.
O there expires the date of my posteritie! Can Nature be so simple or malicious 
to destroy the reputation of her proper memorie? Shee cannot. 
Sure there is some power aboue her that controules her force.
A power aboue Nature? Doubt you that my Lord? Consider but whence 
Man receiues his body and his forme.  Not from corruption like some wormes and Flies; 
but onely from the generation of a man. For Nature neuer did bring forth a man without 
a Man; Nor could the first Man being but the passiue Subiect not the actiue Mouer, 
be the maker of himselfe; So of necessitie there must be a Superiour power to Nature.
Now to my selfe I am ridiculous. Nature thou art a Traytour to my soule. 
Thou hast abus'd my trust. I will complaine to a superiour Court, to right my wrong 
I'le proue thee a forger of false assurances. In yond' Starre chamber thou shalt answere it. 
Withdraw the bodies. O the sence of death begins to trouble my distracted soule.
Bring forth the malefactors to the Barre.
Are you the Gentlewoman in whose house
The murders were committed?
Yes my Lord.
That worthie attribute of Gentrie, which
Your habite drawes from ignorant respect;
Your name deserues not: nor your selfe the name
Of woman. Since you are the poyson that
Infects the honour of all womanhood.
My Lord; I am a Gentlewoman: yet I must confesse 
my pouertie compels my life to a condition lower then my birth or breeding.
Tush we know your birth.
But vnder colour to professe the Sale
Of Tyres and toyes for Gentlewomens pride;
You draw a frequentation of mens wiues
To your licentious house; and there abuse
Their Husbands.—
Good my Lord her rent is great. The good Gentlewoman has no other thing 
to liue by but her lodgings: So, she's forc'd to let her fore-roomes out to others, 
and her selfe contented to lie backwards.
So.
Heere is no euidence accuses you,
For accessaries to the murder; yet
Since from the Spring of lust which you preseru'd;
And nourish'd; ranne th' effusion of that bloud:
Your punishment shall come as neare to death
As life can beare it. Law cannot inflict
Too much seueritie vpon the cause
Of such abhor'd effects.
Receiue your sentence.
Your goods (since they were gotten by that meanes,
Which brings diseases;) shall beturn'd to th'vse
Of Hospitalles. You carted through the Streetes;
According to the common shame of Strumpets,
Your bodies whip'd till with the losse of bloud,
You faint vnder the hand of punishment.
Then that the necessarie force of want,
May not prouoke you to your former life;
You shall be set to painefull labour; whose
Penurious gaines shall onely giue you foode
To hold vp Nature; mortifie your flesh;
And make you fit for a repentant end.
O good my Lord!
No more; away with 'em.
Now Monsieur Snuffe! A man of your profession, found in a place of such impietie?
I grant you. The place is full of impuritie. So much the more neede of instruction 
and reformation. The purpose that caried me thither, was with the Spirit of conuersion 
to purifie their vncleanenesse; and I hope your Lordship will say, 
the law cannot takehold o' me for that.
No Sir; it cannot: but yet giue me leaue
To tell you, that I hold your warie answere,
Rather premeditated for excuse;
Then spoken out of a religious purpose.
Where tooke you your degrees of Schollership?
I am no Scholler my Lord. To speake the sincere truth, I am Snuffe the Tallow-Chandler.
How comes your habite to be alter'd thus?
My Lord Belforest taking a delight in the cleanenesse of my conuersation; 
withdrew mee from that vncleane life, and put me in 
a garment fit for his societie and my present profession.
His Lordship did but paint a rotten post;
Or couer foulenesse fairely. Monsieur Snuffe!
Backe to your candle-making. You may giue
The world more light with that, then either with
Instruction or th'example of your life.
Thus the Snuffe is put out.
Iudgement; Iudgement.
Iudgement my Lord? in what?
Your Iudgements must resolue me in a case. Bring in the bodies. Nay; I will ha't tried. 
This is the case my Lord. My prouidence, eu'n in a moment; by the onely hurt of one, 
or two, or three, at most: and those put quickly out o' paine too, marke mee; 
I had wisely rais'd a competent estate to my posteritie. And is there not more wisedome 
and more charity in that; then for your Lordship, or your Father, or your Grandsire, 
to prolong the torment, and the rack of rent from age to age, vpon your poore penurious 
Tenants? yet (perhaps) without a pennie profit to your heire?
Is't not more wise? more charitable? Speake.
He is distracted.
How? distracted? Then you ha'no Iudgement. I can giue you sence and solide reason for 
the very least distinguishable syllable I speake. Since my thrift was more iudicious then 
your Grandsires; why, I would faine know why your Lordship liues to make a second 
generation from your Father and the whole frie of my posteritie 
extinguish'd in a moment. Not a Brat left to succeede me.—I would faine know that.
Griefe for his children's death distempers him.
My Lord; we will resolue you of your question.
In the meane time vouchsafe your place with vs.
I am contented, so you will resolue me.
Now Monsieur Charlemont. You are accus'd
Of hauing murder'd one Borachio, that
Was seruant to my Lord D'amville. How can
You cleare your selfe? guiltie? or not guiltie?
Guilty of killing him; but not of murder.
My Lords; I haue no purpose to desire
Remission for my selfe.—
Vnciuill Boy! Thou want'st humanitie to smile at griefe. 
Why doest thou cast a chearefull eye vpon the obiect of my sorrow? my dead Sonnes?
O good my Lord! Let Charitie forbeare
To vexe the spirit of a dying Man.
A chearefull eye vpon the face of Death
Is the true court'nance of a noble minde.
For honour's sake (my Lord) molest it not.
Y'are all vnciuill. O! is't not enough that hee vniustly hath conspir'd with Fate, to cut off 
my posteritie for him to be the heire to my possessions; but he must pursue me with 
his presence; and in the ostentation of his ioy, laugh in my face, and glory in my griefe?
D'amville! to shew thee with what light respect 
I value Death and thy insulting pride;
Thus like a warlike Nauie on the Sea,
Bound for the conquest of some wealthie land,
Pass'd through the stormic troubles of this life,
And now arriu'd vpon the armed coast;
In expectation of the victorie,
Whose honour lies beyond this exigent;
Through mortall danger with an actiue spirit,
Thus I aspire to vndergoe my death.
And thus I second thy braue enterprise.
Be chearefull Charlemont. Our liues cut off,
In our young prime of yeares; are like greene hearbs,
Wherewith we strow the hearses of our friends.
For as their vertue gather'd when th'are greene,
Before they wither or corrupt, is best;
So we in vertue are the best for Death,
While yet we haue not liu'd to such an age,
That the encreasing canker of our sinnes,
Hath spread too farre vpon vs.—
A Boone, my Lords. I begge a Boone.
What's that my Lord?
His body when t'is dead for an Anatomie.
For what my Lord?
Your vnderstanding still come short o'mine.
I would finde out by his Anatomie;
What thing there is in Nature more exact,
Then in the constitution of my selfe.
Me thinks, my parts, and my dimentions, are
As many, as large, as well compos'd as his;
And yet in me the resolution wants,
To die with that assurance as he does.
The cause of that, in his Anatomie
I would finde out.
Be patient and you shall.
I haue bethought me of a better way.—Nephew; we must conferre.—
Sir; I am growne a wondrous Studient now o'late. My wit has reach'd beyond 
the scope of Nature; yet for all my learning I am still to seeke, from whence 
the peace of conscience should proceede.
The peace of conscience rises in it selfe.
Whether it be thy Art or Nature, I admire thee Charlemont. Why; thou hast taught 
a woman to be valiant. I will begge thy life.—My Lords! I begge my Nephewes life.
—I'le make thee my Phisitian. Thou shalt read Philosophie to me. I will finde out 
th'efficient cause of a contented minde. But if I cannot profit in't; then t'is no more being 
my Phisitian, but infuse a little poyson in a potion when thou giu'st me Phisick; vnawares 
to me. So I shall steale into my graue without the vnderstanding or the feare of death. 
And that's the end I aime at. For the thought of death is a most fearefull torment; is't not?
Your Lordship interrupts the course of law.
Prepare to die.
My resolution's made.
But ere I die; before this honour'd bench;
With the free voice of a departing soule,
I heere protest this Gentlewoman cleare,
Of all offence the law condemnes her for.
I haue accus'd my selfe. The law wants power
To cleare me. My deare Charlemont; with thee
I will partake of all thy punishments.
Vncle; for all the wealthie benefits
My death aduances you, graunt me but this.
Your mediation for the guiltlesse life
Of Castabella; whom your conscience knowes
As iustly cleare as harmelesse innocence.
Freely. My Mediation for her life; and all my int'rest in the world to boote, 
let her but in exchange possesse me of the resolution that she dies withall.
—The price of things is best knowne in their want. Had I her courage; 
So I value it, the Indies should not buy't out o'my hands.
Giue me a glasse of water.
Mee, of wine.—
This argument of death congeales my bloud.
Colde feare with apprehension of thy end,
Hath frozen vp the riuers of my veines.—
A glasse of wine.
I must drinke vvine to vvarme mee, and dissolue the obstruction, or an apoplexie
will possesse mee.—Why  thou vncharitable Knaue; Do'st bring mee bloud to drinke? 
The very glasse lookes pale and trembles at it.
T'is your hand my Lord.
Canst blame mee to be fearefull; bearing still the presence of a murderer about me?
Is this water?
Water Sir.
Come thou cleare embleme of coole temperance.
Be thou my witnesse, that I vse no art
To force my courage; nor haue neede of helpes,
To raise my Spirits like those weaker men;
Who mixe their bloud with wine, and out of that
Adulterate coniunction doe beget
A bastard valour. Natiue courage, thankes.
Thou lead'st me soberly to vndertake
This great hard worke of magnanimitie.
Braue Charlemont! at the reflexion of thy courage my cold fearefull bloud takes fire, 
and I begin to emulate thy death.—Is that thy executioner? My Lords; you wrong 
the honour of so high a bloud, to let him suffer by so base a hand.
He suffers by the forme of law my Lord.
I will reforme it. Downe you shagge-hair'd Curre. The instrument that strikes 
my Nephew's bloud, shall be as noble as his bloud. I'le be thy executioner my selfe.
Restraine his fury. Good my Lord forbeare.
I'le butcher out the passage of his soule,
That dares attempt to interrupt the blow.
My Lord; the office will impresse a marke
Of scandall and dishonour on your name.
The office fits him; hinder not his hand.
But let him crowne my resolution, with
An vnexampled dignitie of death.
Strike home. Thus I submit me.
So doe I.
In scorne of Death thus hand in hand we die.
I ha' the trick on't Nephew. You shall see how eas'ly
I can put you out of paine.—Ooh.
In lifting vp the Axe
I thinke has knock'd his braines out.—
What murderer was hee that lifted vp my hand against my head?
None but your selfe my Lord.
I thought he was a murderer that did it.
God forbid.
Forbid? You lie Iudge. He commanded it. To tell thee that mans wisedome is a foole. 
I came to thee for Iudgement; and thou think'st thy selfe a wise man. I outreach'd thy wit; 
and made thy Iustice Murders instrument, in Castabella's death and Charlemonts. 
To crowne my Murder of Moneferrers with a safe possession of his wealthie state.—
I claime the iust aduantage of his words.
Descend the Scaffold and attend the rest.
There was the strength of naturall vnderstanding. But Nature is a foole. 
There is a power aboue her that hath ouerthrowne the pride of all my proiects 
and posteritie; (for whose suruiuing bloud, I had erected a proud monument) 
and strucke 'em dead before me. For whose deathes, I call'd to thee for Iudgement. 
Thou didst want discretion for the sentence. But yond' power that strucke me, 
knew the Iudgement I deseru'd; and gaue it.—O! the lust of Death 
commits a Rape vpon me as I would ha'done on Castabella.—
Strange is his death and iudgement. With the hands
Of Ioy and Iustice I thus set you free.
The power of that eternall prouidence,
Which ouerthrew his proiects in their pride;
Hath made your griefes the instruments to raise
Your blessings to a greater height then euer.
Onely to Heau'n I attribute the worke.
Whose gracious motiues made me still forbeare
To be mine owne Reuenger. Now I see,
That, Patience is the honest mans reuenge.
In stead of Charlemont that but e'en now
Stood readie to be dispossess'd of all;
I now salute you with more titles, both
Of wealth and dignitie then you were borne too.
And you (sweer Madame) Lady of Belforest
You haue that title by your Fathers death.
With all the titles due to me; encrease
The wealth and honour of my Charlemont.
Lord of Montferrers; Lord D'amuille; Belforest.
And for a cloze to make vp all the rest;—
The Lord of Castabella. Now at last
Enioy the full possession of my loue;
As cleare and pure as my first chastitie.
The crowne of all my blessings!—I will tempt
My Starres no longer; nor protract my time
Of marriage. When those Nuptiall rites are done;
I will performe my kinsmens funeralles.
The Drums and Trumpets! Interchange the sounds
Of Death and Triumph; for these honour'd iiues,
Succeeding their deserued Tragedies.
Thus by the worke of Heau'n, the men that thought
To follow our dead bodies without teares,
Are dead themselues, and now we follow theirs.